The Project Gutenberg eBook of Coloured engravings of heaths; vol. 4,
by Henry C. Andrews

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online at
www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States, you
will have to check the laws of the country where you are located before
using this eBook.

Title: Coloured engravings of heaths; vol. 4

Author: Henry C. Andrews

Release Date: February 19, 2023 [eBook #70072]

Language: English

Produced by: Chuck Greif and the Online Distributed Proofreading Team at
             https://www.pgdp.net (This file was produced from images
             generously made available by Biodiversity Heritage
             Library.)

*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK COLOURED ENGRAVINGS OF
HEATHS; VOL. 4 ***





                               COLOURED

                              ENGRAVINGS

                                  OF

                                HEATHS.



                          Coloured Engravings

                                  OF

                                HEATHS.

                                  THE

                               DRAWINGS

                              TAKEN FROM

                          LIVING PLANTS ONLY.

                                 WITH

  THE APPROPRIATE SPECIFIC CHARACTER, FULL DESCRIPTION, NATIVE PLACE
               OF GROWTH, AND TIME OF FLOWERING OF EACH;

                         In Latin and English.

    EACH FIGURE ACCOMPANIED BY ACCURATE DISSECTIONS OF THE SEVERAL
           PARTS (MAGNIFIED WHERE NECESSARY) UPON WHICH THE
                SPECIFIC DISTINCTION HAS BEEN FOUNDED,

                           ACCORDING TO THE

                            LINNÆAN SYSTEM.


                          THE WHOLE EXECUTED

                          _By H. C. ANDREWS_,

                   BOTANICAL PAINTER, ENGRAVER, &c.

                               VOL. IV.


                                LONDON:

            PUBLISHED BY THE AUTHOR, NO. 5, KNIGHTSBRIDGE.

             _Printed by R. Taylor and Co. 38, Shoe Lane._

                                 1805.




ERICA Andromedæflora, _alba_.


CHARACTER SPECIFICUS.

ERICA, antheris cristatis, inclusis: stylo sub-incluso: floribus
axillaribus, declinatis: foliis ternatis.


DESCRIPTIO.

CAULIS humilis, fruticosus, robustus, pedalis: rami numerosi, conferti.

FOLIA ternata, subulata, incurvata, robusta: petiolis longis adpressis.

FLORES axillares, sub-terminales, declinati, conferti: calyx magnus,
lato-ovatus, albus: corolla ovata, crassa, alba: oris laciniis erectis.

GERMEN tiaræforme, villosum, ad basin nectariis melliferis instructum.

Habitat ad Caput Bonæ Spei.

Floret a mense Martii ad Junium.


REFERENTIA.

1. Calyx.

2. Corolla.

3. Antheræ et Pistillum, anthera una lente aucta.

4. Germen et Pistillum, stigmate lente aucto.

5. Germen lente auctum.


SPECIFIC CHARACTER.

HEATH, with crested tips, within the blossom: shaft just within: flowers
axillary, and bending down: leaves by threes.


DESCRIPTION.

STEM low, shrubby, and strong, a foot high: branches numerous, and
crowded together.

LEAVES by threes, awl-shaped, incurved, and stout, with long footstalks
pressed to the branches.

FLOWERS grow from the axillæ of the leaves, nearly terminal, hanging
down, and crowded together: empalement large, broadly egg-shaped, and
white: blossom ovate, thick, and white: segments of the border straight.

SEED-BUD turban-shaped, villose, and furnished at the base with
honey-bearing nectaries.

Native of the Cape of Good Hope.

Flowers from March till June.


REFERENCE.

1. The Empalement.

2. A Blossom.

3. The Chives and Pointal, one tip magnified.

4. Seed-bud and Pointal, summit magnified.

5. Seed-bud magnified.


THIS white-flowered variety of the E. _Andromedæflora_, from its hardy,
dwarf, and robust character, might almost be considered as a distinct
species, did not the appearance and shape of the blossoms bear out the
specific title too well to admit of any alteration. The flowers are slow
in growth, and of a thickish and rather tough consistence. It is a hardy
green-house shrub, and blossoms mostly during the spring season.

[Illustration]




ERICA argentiflora.


CHARACTER SPECIFICUS.

ERICA, antheris muticis, inclusis: floribus horizontaliter
verticillatis.


DESCRIPTIO.

CAULIS fruticosus, erectus, sesquipedalis, ramis simplicibus.

FOLIA sena, linearia, apice leviter incurvata, supra plana, subtus
sulcata.

FLORES horizontaliter verticillati prope ramorum summitatem: corolla
clavata, uncialis, oris laciniis patentibus.

GERMEN tiaræforme, sulcatum, ad basin nectariis melliferis instructum.

Habitat ad Caput Bonæ Spei.

Floret a mense Junii ad Octobrem.


REFERENTIA.

1. Calyx.

2. Stamina et Pistillum, antherâ unâ lente auctâ.

3. German et Pistillum, stigmate lente aucto.


SPECIFIC CHARACTER.

HEATH, with beardless tips, within the blossom: flowers growing
horizontally in whorls.


DESCRIPTION.

STEM shrubby, upright, a foot and half high: branches simple.

LEAVES by sixes, linear, slightly turned inward towards the end, flat on
their upper surface, and furrowed beneath.

FLOWERS grow horizontally in whorls near the summit of the branches:
blossom club-shaped, an inch long: segments of the border spreading.

SEED-BUD turban-shaped, furrowed, and furnished at the base with
honey-bearing nectaries.

Native of the Cape of Good Hope.

Flowers from June till October.


REFERENCE.

1. The Empalement.

2. Chives and Pointal, one tip magnified.

3. Seed-bud and Pointal, summit magnified.


THE flowers of the Erica _argentiflora_ are of a delicate transparent
white, most difficult to imitate on a white ground. Our drawing was made
from a plant in the summer of 1814 at the Hammersmith Nursery, where it
flowered with abundance of light graceful blossoms, that continued
successively from June till October. But the precise time of any of the
Ericas flowering is quite indefinite. I have frequently seen many
species in full bloom in one collection, and out of flower in others.
Where they are indigenous, their periods of inflorescence are no doubt
much more determinable than they can ever be in such a versatile clime
as Britain, under different modes of culture.

[Illustration]




ERICA aristata, _minor_.


CHARACTER SPECIFICUS.

ERICA, antheris muticis, inclusis: floribus quaternis, ampullaceis,
viscosis: foliis ternis, confertis.


DESCRIPTIO.

CAULIS erectus, fruticosus, pedalis et ultra: ramulis plerumque ternis,
verticillatis.

FOLIA ternata, sub-trigona, supra plana; subtus sulco-exarata; margine
pilis longis obsita.

FLORES quaterni, patentes: corolla basi inflata, apice attenuata, ima
parte rubra, in media alba, summa saturate purpurea, glutinosissima et
lucida: laciniis oris patentibus: calycis foliolis lanceolatis,
barbatis, adpressis.

GERMEN columnæforme, sulcatum, ad basin nectariis melliferis instructum.

Habitat ad Caput Bonæ Spei.

Floret a mense Junii in Octobrem.


REFERENTIA.

1. Stamina et Pistillum, antherâ unâ lente auctâ.

2. Germen et Pistillum, stigmate lente aucto.

3. Flos varietas rubra.

4. Flos varietas subalbida.


SPECIFIC CHARACTER.

HEATH, with beardless tips within the blossom: flowers grow by fours,
are flask-shaped, and viscous: leaves by threes, crowded together.


DESCRIPTION.

STEM upright, shrubby, a foot or more high: branches grow mostly by
threes, in whorls.

LEAVES by threes, nearly three-sided, flat on their upper surface, and
deeply furrowed beneath; the margins are beset with long hairs.

FLOWERS grow by fours, spreading: the blossom is swelled at the base,
and tapers to the point, red on the lower part, white in the centre, and
of a deep purple towards the end, very glutinous, and shining: the
segments of the border are spreading: the leaflets of the cup are
lance-shaped, bearded, and pressed to the blossom.

SEED-BUD pillar-shaped, furrowed, and furnished at the base with
honey-bearing nectaries.

Native of the Cape of Good Hope.

Flowers from June till October.


REFERENCE.

1. The Chives and Pointal, one tip magnified.

2. Seed-bud and Pointal, summit magnified.

3. Flower of a red variety.

4. Flower of a pale variety.


AMONGST cultivators, this plant bears the specific titles of aristata
minor, and tricolor; neither of them very appropriate, as it does not
possess three distinct colours; nor can it with propriety be considered
as a variety of the E. aristata: but as it is well known by that
appellation, we have retained it. There are two variations of it at
present in cultivation with us; a flower of each is given, with the
dissections. The pale-flowered variety is from the conservatory of the
Marquis of Blandford, and we have not as yet seen it in any other
collection. It appears to be a plant of easy culture, and was raised
from Cape seed about the year 1806.

[Illustration]




ERICA Bandonia.


CHARACTER SPECIFICUS.

ERICA antheris muticis, inclusis: stylo exerto: floribus terminalibus:
pedunculis longissimis: foliis ternis.


DESCRIPTIO.

CAULIS pedalis, fruticosus: rami et ramuli erecto-patentes.

FOLIA terna, trigona, subulata, recta; supra plana subtus carinato.

FLORES terminales in umbellis, quinis vel decem, cum pedunculis
longissimis rubris: corollis urceolatis: oris laciniis patentes equalis.

GERMEN tiaræforme, ad basin nectariis melliferis instructum.

Habitat ad Caput Bonæ Spei.

Floret a mense Julii in Septembrem.


REFERENTIA.

1. Calyx.

2. Stamina et Pistillum, antherâ unâ lente auctâ.

3. Germen et Pistillum stigmate lente aucto.


SPECIFIC CHARACTER.

HEATH with beardless tips within the blossom: shaft without flowers,
terminal: footstalks very long: leaves by threes.


DESCRIPTION.

STEM a foot high, shrubby; small and large branches between; erect and
spreading.

LEAVES by threes, three-sided, awl-shaped, and straight; flat on their
upper surface, and keeled beneath.

FLOWERS terminate the branches in umbels of five to ten, with very long
red footstalks: blossom pitcher-shaped: segments of the border spreading
and equal.

SEED-BUD turban shaped, with honey bearing nectaries at the base.

Native of the Cape of Good Hope.

Flowers from July till September.


REFERENCE.

1. The Empalement.

2. Chives and Pointal, one tip magnified.

3. Seed-bud and Pointal, summit magnified.


THIS Erica, named in honour of Lord Bandon, was raised from Cape seed at
the Hammersmith Nursery. It is rather a dwarf, shrubby plant, with
numerous flowers, the blossoms resemble the E. Ventricosa; the great
length of the flower-stalks, are like the E. Irbyana, as is also the
foliage, which likewise bear a similitude to the leaves of the E.
taxifolia; but altogether it is perfectly distinct from any one hitherto
delineated, and makes a brilliant appearance towards the autumn.

[Illustration]




ERICA Bauera.


CHARACTER SPECIFICUS.

ERICA antheris aristatis, inclusis: floribus spicatis, axillaribus,
dependentibus: foliis quaternis: caule erecto.


DESCRIPTIO.

CAULIS erectus, flexuosus; ramis longis, cum ramulis binis vel ternis,
verticillatis.

FOLIA quaterna, linearia, obtusa, glauca, plerumque patentia.

FLORES in medio ramorum, spicati: corollis dependentibus,
subpollicaribus, cylindraceis, curvatis, pellucide albidis: pedunculis
longis, bracteis tribus instructis.

Habitat ad Caput Bonæ Spei.

Floret a mense Augusti ad Novembrem.


REFERENTIA.

1. Folium.

2. Idem subtus.

3. Calyx.

4. Stamen unum lente auctum.

5. Germen et Pistillum, stigmate lente aucto.


SPECIFIC CHARACTER.

HEATH, with bearded tips within the blossom: flowers grow in spikes from
the axillæ of the leaves, hanging down: leaves by fours: stem upright.


DESCRIPTION.

STEM upright and flexuose: the large branches are long, with smaller
branches of two or three in whorls.

LEAVES by fours, linear, obtuse, glaucous, and mostly spreading.

FLOWERS grow in spikes about the middle of the larger branches: blossoms
hanging down, nearly an inch long, cylindrical, curved, of a transparent
white: peduncles long, and furnished with three floral leaves.

Native of the Cape of Good Hope.

Flowers from August till November.


REFERENCE.

1. A Leaf.

2. The same shown from the under side.

3. The Empalement.

4. A Chive magnified.

5. Seed-bud and Pointal, summit magnified.


WE found this new species of Erica in bloom at the Hammersmith Nursery
in the autumn of 1823, under the specific title of _Bauera_, in
compliment to Mr. Bauer, Botanic Draftsman to the Royal Gardens at Kew.
Throughout this extensive Genus of plants, we do not know any one it
resembles at present: but in three or four years time the case may be
different, Mr. Lee having a collector now in the interior of the Cape in
search of novelties; and should his attempt in exploring that botanic
mine prove successful, we may expect an importation of many distinct
species and beautiful varieties.

[Illustration]




ERICA Beaumontia.


CHARACTER SPECIFICUS.

ERICA muticis inclusis; floribus campanulatis; cernuis, foliis linearia
glandulosa; caule fruticoso.


DESCRIPTIO.

CAULIS sub pedalis, fruticosus, ramis et ramulis flexuosis.

FOLIA plerumque quaterna, linearia, patentia, obtusa, supra plana,
subtus sulcata: marginibus glandulosus.

FLORES in ultimis ramulis terminales ternis vel senis, pedunculi, rubri:
corolla campanulata, cernui, magna alba: oris laciniis revolutis.

GERMEN tiaræforme, sulcatum: ad basin nectariis melliferis instructum.

Habitat ad Caput Bonæ Spei.

Floret a mense Maii in Julium.


REFERENTIA.

1. Folium auctum.

2. Calyx.

3. Stamina et pistillum.

4. Stamen, antherâ unâ lente auctâ.

5. Germen et pistillum, stigmate lente aucto.


SPECIFIC CHARACTER.

HEATH, with beardless tips, within the blossom: flowers bell-shaped,
nodding: leaves linear and glandular: stem shrubby.


DESCRIPTION.

STEM near a foot high, shrubby: the large and smaller branches flexuose.

LEAVES mostly by fours, linear, spreading and obtuse, nearly flat on
their upper surface, and furrowed beneath: with glandular margins.

FLOWERS terminate the ends of the smaller branches in threes or sixes,
footstalk, red: blossom bell-shaped, nodding, large and white: segments
of border rolled back.

SEED-BUD turban-shaped and furrowed; furnished at the base with
honey-bearing nectaries.

Native of the Cape of Good Hope.

Flowers from the month of May till July.


REFERENCE.

1. A Leaf magnified.

2. The Empalement.

3. Chives and pointal.

4. A Chive, one tip magnified.

5. Seed-bud and pointal, summit magnified.


THIS fine new species of Erica was raised from Cape seed last Autumn,
1827, and flowered the ensuing Summer for the first time at the Nursery
of Messrs. Rollinson, Lower Tooting. We have named it after Mrs.
Beaumont, of Bretton Hall, near Wakefield, Yorkshire, a great admirer of
this fine genus of plants. The only heath throughout this extensive
family, to which it bears any resemblance, is the E. odorata. It is a
handsome dwarf shrub, flowering freely during the months of May and
June.

[Illustration]




ERICA colorans.


CHARACTER SPECIFICUS.

ERICA, antheris muticis, inclusis: floribus spicatis, confertis: foliis
quaternis.


DESCRIPTIO.

CAULIS fruticosus, erectus, pedalis et ultra: ramuli numerosi, breves,
tomentosi.

FOLIA quaterna, linearia, tomentosa, obtusa.

FLORES fere ramos terminant, racemum longum densum formantes: corolla
tubulato-campanulata, diaphana, imprimis alba, denique saturate rosacea.

GERMEN tiaræforme, sulcatum, ad basin nectariis melliferis instructum.

Habitat ad Caput Bonæ Spei.

Floret a mense Martii in Augustum.


REFERENTIA.

1. Calyx.

2. Antheræ et Pistillum, anthera una lente aucta.

3. Germen et Pistillum, stigmate lente aucto.


SPECIFIC CHARACTER.

HEATH, with beardless tips, within the blossom: flowers grow in crowded
spikes: leaves by fours.


DESCRIPTION.

STEM shrubby, upright, a foot or more high: the smaller branches are
numerous, short, and downy.

LEAVES by fours, linear, downy, and blunt-ended.

FLOWERS nearly terminate the branches, making a long close bunch:
blossom tubularly bell-shaped, transparent, white at first, and then
dying off of a deep rose colour.

SEED-BUD turban-shaped, furrowed, and furnished at the base with
honey-bearing nectaries.

Native of the Cape of Good Hope.

Flowers from March till August.


REFERENCE.

1. Calyx.

2. Chives and Pointal, one tip magnified.

3. Seed-bud and Pointal, summit magnified.


THIS Erica may be considered as an elegant but distinct variety of the
E. _Linnæa_. It is well known by the specific title of _colorans_, in
reference to the rich red colour the flowers acquire as the blossoms
decay, which gives a very singular motley appearance to the plant. It
continues a long time in successive bloom; and requires a dry airy
situation in the green-house, to protect its small crowded downy foliage
from the atmospheric damps too prevalent in this climate.

[Illustration]




ERICA Comptoniana.


CHARACTER SPECIFICUS.

ERICA, antheris aristatis minutis, inclusis, stylo sub-incluso: floribus
in umbellis terminalibus: foliis ternis.


DESCRIPTIO.

CAULIS fruticosus, pedalis et ultra: rami et ramuli filiformes,
adscendentes.

FOLIA ternata, curvata, subulata, acuta.

FLORES ramos terminant, plerumque in umbellis 3-6; calyx adpressus,
pedunculis longis: corolla urceolata, erecto-patens, rubro-purpurea:
oris laciniis æqualibus, patentibus.

GERMEN columnare, tenue, bicoloratum.

Habitat ad Caput Bonæ Spei.

Floret a mense Martii in Augustum.


REFERENTIA.

1. Calyx lente auctus.

2. Folium lente auctum.

3. Antheræ et Pistillum, anthera una lente aucta.

4. Germen et Pistillum, stigmate lente aucto.

5. Germen lente auctum.


SPECIFIC CHARACTER.

HEATH, with minutely bearded tips, within; shaft just within the
blossom: flowers grow in terminal umbels: leaves by threes.


DESCRIPTION.

STEM shrubby, a foot or more high: the small and large branches are
thread-shaped and ascending.

LEAVES by threes, curved, awl-shaped, and sharp-pointed.

FLOWERS terminate the branches, mostly in umbels of 3 to 6: empalement
pressed to the blossom: footstalks long: blossom pitcher-shaped, erect,
and spreading, of a red purple colour: segments of the border equal and
spreading.

SEED-BUD pillar-shaped, slender, and two-coloured.

Native of the Cape of Good Hope.

Flowers from the month of March till August.


REFERENCE.

1. Empalement magnified.

2. A Leaf magnified.

3. Chives and Pointal, one tip magnified.

4. Seed-bud and Pointal, summit magnified.

5. Seed-bud magnified.


THIS fine new species of Erica we have named in honour of the Countess
of Northampton, a great admirer and encourager of botanic science. Our
drawing was made from plants in the Hammersmith collection, raised from
Cape seed about the year 1815. Like many other species, we have found it
in bloom in every season of the year; but the most general period of
inflorescence for the whole genus is from the middle of spring till the
beginning of autumn.

[Illustration]




ERICA costata, _superba_.


CHARACTER SPECIFICUS.

ERICA, antheris muticis, inclusis: stylo exerto: floribus terminalibus
ternatis: caule erecto.


DESCRIPTIO.

CAULIS bipedalis, fruticosus, erectus, ramosus: ramuli frequentissimi,
longi.

FOLIA caulina terna, linearia obtusa, pubescentia: folia ramentacea
erectiora, hirsuta.

FLORES in ramulis terminalibus plerumque terni, subcernui: corolla
cylindrico-clavata, pollicari, pallide carnea, costata: oris laciniis
luteo-albentibus.

Habitat ad Caput Bonæ Spei.

Floret a mense Maio ad Julium.


REFERENTIA.

1. Calyx.

2. Anthera una, summitate lente aucta.

3. Germen et Pistillum, stigmate lente aucto.

4. Germen lente auctum.

5. Flos varietatis monstrosæ.


SPECIFIC CHARACTER.

HEATH, with beardless tips, within the blossom: shaft without: flowers
terminate the branches by threes: stem upright.


DESCRIPTION.

STEM two feet high, shrubby, upright, and branching: small branches
numerous and long.

LEAVES on the stem by threes, linear obtuse, and downy: those on the
smaller branches are more upright, and hirsute.

FLOWERS terminate the branches, mostly by threes, nearly drooping:
blossom cylindrically club-shaped, an inch long, of a pale flesh colour,
and ribbed: segments of the border of a whitish yellow.

Native of the Cape of Good Hope.

Flowers from the month of May till July.


REFERENCE.

1. Empalement.

2. A Chive, summit magnified.

3. Seed-bud and Pointal, summit magnified.

4. Seed-bud magnified.

5. Flower of a monstrous variety.


THIS delicate-flowered Heath was raised at the Hammersmith Nursery in
the summer of 1820, under the specific title of E. costata, _superba_
(said to be raised from the seed of the E. costata). There were two
plants of it that flowered: one tall, the other short and bushy. We
preferred the tall one, being the finest and most in flower, but have
given a flower from the other plant, which differed a little in shape,
and had also two blossoms on it, like the one represented, a kind of
monstrosity that sometimes occurs. Upon dissecting the other, we found
all the anthers surmounted by the appearance of an increasing petal, and
they seemed to have been produced solely at the expense of their
fertility, as the absence of the pollen was all the difference we could
discern, neither the shape nor colour having suffered any alteration.

[Illustration]




ERICA Coventrya.


CHARACTER SPECIFICUS.

ERICA antheris muticis, inclusis: foliis quaternis, confertis: floribus
sessilibus, fasciculatis terminalibus: frutex pygmæus.


DESCRIPTIO.

CAULIS humilis, fruticosus: ramuli numerosi adapice ramis conferti.

FOLIA plerumque, quarterna, linearia, supra plana subtus sulcata.

FLORES sessiles, fascisculatis terminales: corollis ventricosus, rubris,
lacinis cordatis, expansio, albis, subtus læte rubris.

GERMEN tiaræforme, sulcatum, ad basin nectariis meliferis instructum.

Habitat ad Caput Bonæ Spei.

Floret a mense Julii in Septembrem.


REFERENTIA.

1. Calyx.

2. Corolla.

3. Stamina et Pistullum.

4. Germen et Pistillum, stigmate lente aucto.


SPECIFIC CHARACTER.

HEATH with beardless tips within the blossom: leaves by fours, crowded:
flowers sessile, terminating the branches in bunches: a dwarf shrub.


DESCRIPTION.

STEM low, shrubby: smaller branches are numerous and crowded together at
the end of the larger branches.

LEAVES mostly grow by fours, linear, flat on their upper surface, and
furrowed beneath.

FLOWERS sessile, in terminal bunches: blossom bellied and red, the
segments of the border are heart-shaped, spreading, and white; of a
bright red on the under side.

SEED-BUD turban-shaped, furrowed, with honey bearing nectaries at the
base.

Native of the Cape of Good Hope.

Flowers from July till September.


REFERENCE.

1. The Empalement.

2. A Blossom.

3. The Chives and Pointal.

4. Seed-bud and Pointal, summit magnified.


This Erica resembles the E. primuloides in its foliage, also in the
shape and colour of the blossom, but differs greatly in the manner of
its growth, as the flowers, in this plant, terminate the branches in
complex umbells, more like the genus Daphne than Erica.

It is one of those fine seminal varieties raised from Cape seed at the
Hammersmith Nursery, and received its specific title in honour of the
Earl of Coventry.

[Illustration]




ERICA crassifolia.


CHARACTER SPECIFICUS.

ERICA antheris muticis inclusis; floribus terminalibus; corolla
campanulata; folia terna; caulis fruticosus.


DESCRIPTIO.

CAULIS humilis, fruticosus; rami et ramuli flexuosi.

FOLIA terna, oblonga, fere rotunda, brevia, carnosa, glauca, patentia et
adscendentia.

FLORES ramulos subterminantes, plerumque terni; corolla campanulata,
rosea, oris laciniis cordatis, reflexis.

GERMEN tiaræforme, sulcatum, ad basin nectariis melliferis instructum.

Habitat ad Caput Bonæ Spei.

Floret a mense Aprili in Julium.


REFERENTIA.

1. Folium, lente auctum.

2. Calyx, lente auctus.

3. Stamina et Pistillum.

4. Stamen unum, lente auctum.

5. Germen et Pistillum, stigmate lente aucta.


SPECIFIC CHARACTER.

HEATH with beardless tips within the blossom; flowers terminal; blossom
bell-shaped; leaves by threes; stem shrubby.


DESCRIPTION.

STEM low, shrubby, the large and smaller branches flexuose.

LEAVES by threes, oblong, roundish, short, fleshy, glaucous, spreading,
and ascending.

FLOWERS nearly terminate the smaller branches, mostly by threes; blossom
bell-shaped, rose-coloured; segments of the border heart-shaped, and
reflexed.

SEED-BUD turban-shaped, furrowed, and furnished at the base with
honey-bearing nectaries.

Native of the Cape of Good Hope.

Flowers from the month of April till July.


REFERENCE.

1. A leaf, magnified.

2. Empalement, magnified.

3. Chives and Pointal.

4. One Chive, magnified.

5. Seed-bud and Pointal, summit magnified.


THE Erica crassifolia is a perfectly new species, raised last summer
from Cape seed, at Messrs. Rollinson’s, Lower Tooting. It is a low bushy
shrub, possessing a smooth handsome foliage, of a thick and fleshy
appearance; by no means common to the genus, and therefore will not be
very difficult to distinguish either in, or out of bloom. Flowers during
the months of May and June.

[Illustration]




ERICA cruciformis.


CHARACTER SPECIFICUS.

ERICA, antheris bicornibus, inclusis: floribus quaternis, tubulosis,
brevibus: foliis quaternis, brevibus, linearibus: caule fruticoso,
erecto.


DESCRIPTIO.

CAULIS pedalis, fruticosus: ramulis numerosis, confertis.

FOLIA quaterna, linearia obtusa, glabra, supra plana, subtus sulcata.

FLORES quaterni, cruciformes: ramulis plerumque terminalibus: corolla
urceolata, aurantia, lucida: laciniis rotundatis, reflexis.

Habitat ad Caput Bonæ Spei.

Floret a mense Junio ad Augustum.


REFERENTIA.

1. Calyx.

2. Stamen unicum lente auctum.

3. Germen et Pistillum, stigmate lente aucto.

4. Germen lente auctum.

5. Flores varietatum duarum.


SPECIFIC CHARACTER.

HEATH, with tips two-horned, within the blossom: flowers grow by fours,
tubular, short and linear: stem shrubby and upright.


DESCRIPTION.

STEM a foot high, and shrubby: the smaller branches numerous and
crowded.

LEAVES by fours, linear obtuse, and smooth, flat on the upper surface,
and furrowed beneath.

FLOWERS grow by fours, cross-shaped, mostly terminating the smaller
branches: blossom jar-shaped, of a gold colour, and shining: segments of
the border rounded and reflexed.

Native of the Cape of Good Hope.

Flowers from the month of June till August.


REFERENCE.

1. The Empalement.

2. A Chive magnified.

3. Seed-bud and Pointal, summit magnified.

4. Seed-bud magnified.

5. Flowers of two varieties.


OUR drawing of this handsome little Erica was made at the nursery of Mr.
Lee in the summer of 1819, where it had been recently raised from seed,
with two others of a similar description too nearly allied to require a
separate figure. We have therefore added a flower of each, and hardly
knew to which of the three plants to give the preference. But as the
specific title cruciformis was given to them, we selected that for our
figure whose inflorescence bore out the name with the most uniformity.

[Illustration]




ERICA droseroides, _minor_.


CHARACTER SPECIFICUS.

ERICA, antheris cristatis, inclusis: floribus terminalibus, cernuis:
foliis ternatis: caule fruticoso, erecto.


DESCRIPTIO.

CAULIS spithamæus, fruticosus: ramis filiformibus, sparsis, erectis,
patentibus, virgatis.

FOLIA terna, linearia, obtusa, marginibus pilis glandulosis, micantibus.

FLORES in umbellis terminalibus, cernui: corolla urceolata, læte
purpurea, costata, viscosa: ore obliquo, arctato, profunde sanguineo:
pedunculi longissimi pilis glandulosis tecti.

Habitat ad Caput Bonæ Spei.

Floret a mense Julii in Octobrem.


REFERENTIA.

1. Folii pars inferior lente aucta.

2. Calyx lente auctus.

3. Anthera una lente aucta.

4. Germen et Pistillum, stigmate lente aucto.


SPECIFIC CHARACTER.

HEATH, with crested tips within the blossom; flowers terminal and
nodding; leaves by threes; stem shrubby and upright.


DESCRIPTION.

STEM a span high and shrubby: branches long, scattered, erect,
spreading, and twiggy.

LEAVES by threes, linear and blunt, with shining glandular hairs on the
margins.

FLOWERS grow in terminal umbels, nodding: blossom pitcher-shaped, of a
bright purple colour, ribbed and clammy: the mouth is oblique, narrowed,
and of a deep blood colour: footstalks very long, and covered with
glandular hairs.

Native of the Cape of Good Hope.

Flowers from the month of July till October.


REFERENCE.

1. The under side of a Leaf magnified.

2. The Empalement magnified.

3. A Chive magnified.

4. Seed-bud and Pointal, summit magnified.


OUR figure represents an entire plant from the Hammersmith Nursery,
raised from seed in the autumn of 1820, after an absence of fifteen
years; during which period we believe it has been lost to every
collection we are acquainted with. It can only be retained by care and
attention to preserve it from damp, of which it is much more susceptible
than the generality of this extended genus.

[Illustration]




ERICA dumosa.


CHARACTER SPECIFICUS.

ERICA, antheris muticis, exertis: floribus terminalibus, pendulis:
pedunculis longissimis: foliis ternatis.


DESCRIPTIO.

CAULIS humilis, fruticosus: ramis numerosis, filiformibus.

FOLIA ternata, ovata, hispida, patentia, margine revoluta, subtus
glauca.

FLORES terminales in umbellis: corolla pendula, urceolata, purpurea:
pedunculis patentibus, longissimis, tenuibus.

GERMEN tiaræforme, sulcatum, tomentosum, ad basin nectariis melliferis
instructum.

Habitat ad Caput Bonæ Spei.

Floret a mense Julii ad Novembrem.


REFERENTIA.

1. Folium auctum.

2. Stamina et Pistillum, antherâ unâ lente auctâ.

3. Germen et Pistillum, stigmate lente aucto.

4. Germen lente auctum.


SPECIFIC CHARACTER.

HEATH, with beardless tips, without the blossom: flowers terminal and
pendulous: footstalks very long: leaves by threes.


DESCRIPTION.

STEM low, shrubby: branches numerous and thread-shaped.

LEAVES by threes, ovate, hispid, and spreading, rolled back at the
edges, and glaucous beneath.

FLOWERS terminate the branches in umbels: blossom pendulous,
pitcher-shaped, and purple: footstalks spreading, very long, and
slender.

SEED-BUD turban-shaped, furrowed, downy, and furnished at the base with
honey-bearing nectaries.

Native of the Cape of Good Hope.

Flowers from the month of July till November.


REFERENCE.

1. A leaf magnified.

2. Chives and Pointal, one tip magnified.

3. Seed-bud and Pointal, summit magnified.

4. Seed-bud magnified.


THE Erica _dumosa_ is one of those few species whose rude exterior
differs from the leading feature of neatness and uniformity so prevalent
throughout this extensive family of plants. It is a dwarf shrub, with
crowded irregular branches and coarse foliage, but possessing bright
purple flowers on very long peduncles. By some cultivators it is called
_longipedunculata_, a little more descriptive than specific, and which
might be confounded with the E. _pedunculata_. But as a low bushy shrub
it may easily be recognised by the unoccupied title of _dumosa_. Our
figure represents an entire plant raised from seed at the Hammersmith
Nursery in 1815. It requires rather more attention than usual, to
prevent the long slender footstalks of the flowers from being too
powerfully influenced by the atmosphere, which sometimes gives them a
very disordered appearance.

[Illustration]




ERICA Echiflora, _purpurea_.


CHARACTER SPECIFICUS.

ERICA, antheris muticis inclusis: floribus terminalibus, tubulosis et
costatis: foliis linearis confertis: caule fruticoso.


DESCRIPTIO.

CAULIS fruticosus, sesquipedalis: ramis et ramulis flexuosis.

FOLIA irregulariter verticillati, quina vel sena, linearia: undulata,
patentia.

FLORES in umbellis confertis, horizontales: corolla tubulosa, purpurea,
brevis, inflata, costata: laciniis patentibus cordatis, pedunculi brevi.

GERMEN tiaræforme, sulcatum: ad basin nectariis melliferis instructum.

Habitat ad Caput Bonæ Spei.

Floret a mense Autumnales.


REFERENTIA.

1. Folium auctum.

2. Calyx lente auctus.

3. Flos.

4. Stamen et pistillum, antherâ unâ lente auctâ.

5. Germen et pistillum, stigmate lente aucto.

6. Germen auctum.

7. Flos varietas.


SPECIFIC CHARACTER.

HEATH, with beardless tips within the blossom; flowers terminal,
tubular, and ribbed; leaves linear and crowded: stem shrubby.


DESCRIPTION.

STEM shrubby, a foot and half high: the large and smaller branches
flexuose.

LEAVES grow in irregular whorls, of fives and sixes: waved and
spreading.

FLOWERS grow in umbels, crowded and horizontal: blossom tubular, purple,
short, inflated, and ribbed: segments of the border heart-shaped and
spreading: footstalks short.

SEED-BUD turban-shaped, furrowed, and furnished at the base with
honey-bearing nectaries.

Native of the Cape of Good Hope.

Flowers during the Autumnal months.


REFERENCE.

1. A Leaf magnified.

2. The Empalement magnified.

3. A Flower.

4. The chives and pointal, one tip magnified.

5. Seed-bud and pointal, summit magnified.

6. Seed-bud magnified.

7. Flower of a variety.


THIS handsome shrub differs not only in the colour of its flowers from
the E. Echiflora, figured in Vol. 3, but also in its foliage, which are
much smaller, thinner, and closer together. It bears numerous bright
purple blossoms, crowded together at the ends of the branches; there are
two slight varieties, one of a paler colour, and the other longer in the
flower and curved, a flower of which is given with the dissections. Our
figure was made from plants in the Hammersmith Collection.

[Illustration]




ERICA exsurgens hybrida.


CHARACTER SPECIFICUS.

ERICA antheris muticis, exsertis: floribus verticillatis: foliis senis:
caule erecto.


DESCRIPTIO.

CAULIS sesquipedalis, erectus: ramis et ramulis longis, simplicibus.

FOLIA sena, conferta, tenuia, linearia, adscendentia: pedunculi
longissimi.

FLORES in medio ramorum, verticillati, recti, verticillis alter alteri
exsurgentibus: corolla clavata, cylindracea, uncialis, curvata, carnea:
oris laciniis magnis, revolutis, intus subalbidis.

GERMEN tiaræforme, sulcatum, villosum, ad basin nectariis melliferis
instructum.

Habitat ad Caput Bonæ Spei.

Floret per menses autumnales.


REFERENTIA.

1. Calyx.

2. Stamen unum, anthera lente aucta.

3. Germen et Pistillum, stigmate lente aucto.

4. Germen lente auctum.


SPECIFIC CHARACTER.

HEATH with beardless tips without the blossom; flowers grow in whorls;
leaves by sixes; stem upright.


DESCRIPTION.

STEM a foot and half high, upright; the large and smaller branches, long
and simple.

LEAVES by sixes, crowded together, thin, linear, and ascending:
footstalks very long.

FLOWERS grow about the middle of the branches, in whorls, straight, the
whorls rising out of each other in succession: blossom cylindrically
club-shaped, an inch long, curved, and flesh-coloured: segments of the
mouth large, revolute, and nearly white within.

SEED-BUD turban-shaped, furrowed, villose, and furnished at the base
with honey-bearing nectaries.

Native of the Cape of Good Hope.

Flowers during the autumnal months.


REFERENCE.

1. The Empalement.

2. A Chive, summit magnified.

3. Seed-bud and Pointal, summit magnified.

4. Seed-bud magnified.


THIS Erica resembles the E. exsurgens in its flowering, with some
affinity in the foliage to the E. vestita alba, and is considered an
hybrid production between those species.

Our figure was taken from a plant, four years old, at the nursery of
Messrs. Rollinson, Lower Tooting, in the autumn of 1824, where it was
first raised from seed, and is at present regarded as a perfectly new
and scarce Heath.

[Illustration]




ERICA exudans.


CHARACTER SPECIFICUS.

ERICA, antheris muticis, sub-inclusis; stylo sub-exerto: floribus
cylindraceis, terminalibus: foliis quaternis, glandulosis, viscosis.


DESCRIPTIO.

CAULIS sesquipedalis, fruticosus, ramulis numerosis erectis.

FOLIA quaterna, linearia, obtusa, glandulosa, viscosa, erecto-patentia.

FLORES plerumque quaterni, cernui, terminales; corollis cylindraceis,
costatis, luteolo-rubris, sub-uncialibus, arcuatis.

GERMEN tiaræforme, sulcatum, ad basin nectariis melliferis instructum.

Habitat ad Caput Bonæ Spei.

Floret a mense Julii ad Novembrem.


REFERENTIA.

1. Folium lente auctum.

2. Calyx lente auctus.

3. Germen lente auctum.

4. Germen et Pistillum, stigmate lente aucto.


SPECIFIC CHARACTER.

HEATH with bearded tips, just within the blossom: shaft just without:
flowers cylindrical, and terminating the branches: leaves by fours,
glandular, and clammy.


DESCRIPTION.

STEM a foot and half high, shrubby, with numerous small upright
branches.

LEAVES by fours, linear, blunt-ended, glandular, viscous, and between
erect and spreading.

FLOWERS mostly by fours, nodding, and terminal: blossoms cylindrical,
ribbed, of a yellowish red, near an inch long, and slightly bowed.

SEED-BUD turban-shaped, furrowed, and furnished at the base with
honey-bearing nectaries.

Native of the Cape of Good Hope.

Flowers from July till November.


REFERENCE.

1. A Leaf magnified.

2. The Empalement magnified.

3. Seed-bud magnified.

4. Seed-bud and Pointal, summit magnified.


THIS Erica bears the compound appearance of the E. _droseroides_ and E.
_costata_; resembling the latter in its flowers, and the former in its
foliage, which is covered with glands, from which a thin and viscous
juice exudes. Our drawing of it was first taken from plants in the
Nursery of Mr. Buchanan at Camberwell, as long back as 1805; since that
time it has been so nearly lost, that it was shown to us as a novelty in
1815; and we should not be surprised if it again becomes an absentee, as
the few Ericas that possess glands on the foliage are difficult to
preserve either in beauty or health, being subject to the adhesion of
all sorts of dust, which obscuring their verdure, at the same time
obstructs that perspiration, which being so very apparent, indicates it
to be indispensably requisite to the health of the plant.

[Illustration]




ERICA flagelliformis.


CHARACTER SPECIFICUS.

ERICA, antheris cristatis, inclusis: flores ramos terminant in umbellis:
foliis ternatis: ramis virgatis.


DESCRIPTIO.

CAULIS virgatus, pedalis: rami et ramuli filiformes, flexuosissimi.

FOLIA ternata, erecta, crassa, obtusa, cauli adpressa.

FLORES ramos terminant in umbellis; pedunculi carnei: perianthium
tetraphyllum: foliolis spathulatis, acuminatis, carneis: corolla
urceolata, saturate carnea, ad basin pallida: oris laciniis patentibus.

GERMEN tiaræforme, sulcatum, ad basin nectariis melliferis instructum.

Habitat ad Caput Bonæ Spei.

Floret a mense Junii in Augustum.


REFERENTIA.

1. Calyx.

2. Corolla.

3. Antheræ et Pistillum, anthera una lente aucta.

4. Germen et Pistillum, stigmate lente aucto.

5. Germen lente auctum.

6. Ramus varietatis parvæ.

7. Ramus varietatis minoris erectæ.


SPECIFIC CHARACTER.

HEATH, with crested tips, within the blossom: flowers terminate the
branches in umbels: leaves by threes; branches twiggy.


DESCRIPTION.

STEM twiggy, a foot high; the large and smaller branches are
thread-shaped, and very flexuose.

LEAVES by threes, straight, thick, obtuse, and pressed to the stem.

FLOWERS terminate the branches in umbels; footstalks flesh-coloured:
empalement four-leaved; leaflets spathula-shaped, pointed, and
flesh-coloured: blossom pitcher-shaped, of a deep flesh-colour, but
paler at the base: segments of the border spreading.

SEED-BUD turban-shaped, furrowed, and furnished at the base with
honey-bearing nectaries.

Native of the Cape of Good Hope.

Flowers from June till August.


REFERENCE.

1. The Empalement.

2. The Blossom.

3. The Chives and Pointal, one tip magnified.

4. Seed-bud and Pointal, summit magnified.

5. Seed-bud magnified.

6. Branch of a small variety.

7. Branch of a smaller upright variety.


THIS Erica is figured from a drawing made in the gardens of G. Hibbert,
Esq. as long back as the summer of 1806, where it was raised from Cape
seed amongst many others, and considered as nearer allied to the E.
_calycina_ than any other species. There was only one more plant of it,
and that was of a very straggling growth, hanging down over the sides of
the pot in all directions, making a very picturesque appearance, and to
which we should certainly have given the preference, if we had not
considered it more a casualty of culture than as a permanent
character,--which we had not the opportunity of ascertaining, as both
the plants died in the autumn,--we apprehend, from an excessive
inflorescence,--and have never since re-appeared. Among the dissections
we have given branches of two small seminal varieties, almost distinct
enough to require a separate figure.

[Illustration]




ERICA foliacea.


CHARACTER SPECIFICUS.

ERICA antheris aristatis, inclusis; floribus ramulos terminantibus,
quaternis: foliis sparsis: caule erecto: ramis et ramulis foliis tectis.


DESCRIPTIO.

CAULIS pedalis, fruticosus: ramis longis, adscendentibus: ramulis
perbrevibus.

FOLIA sparsa, numerosa, adscendentia, linearia, obtusa.

FLORES ramulos terminant, quaterni, subsessiles: corolla subcylindracea,
curvata, cernuo-patente, subpollicari, flava, et transparente.

Habitat ad Caput Bonæ Spei.

Floret a mense Augusti in Octobrem.


REFERENTIA.

1. Calyx.

2. Stamen unum lente auctum.

3. Germen et Pistillum, stigmate lente aucto.

4. Germen lente auctum.


SPECIFIC CHARACTER.

HEATH with bearded tips within the blossom: flowers terminate the
smaller branches by fours: leaves scattered; stem upright: the large and
smaller branches covered with leaves.


DESCRIPTION.

STEM a foot high, shrubby: the larger branches long and ascending: the
smaller ones very short.

LEAVES scattered, numerous, ascending, linear, and obtuse.

FLOWERS grow from the ends of the smaller branches by fours, and nearly
sessile: blossom nearly cylindrical, curved, between spreading and
nodding, nearly an inch long, yellow, and transparent.

Native of the Cape of Good Hope.

Flowers from the month of August till October.


REFERENCE.

1. The Empalement.

2. A Chive magnified.

3. Seed-bud and Pointal, summit magnified.

4. Seed-bud magnified.


THIS Erica in its flower resembles the E. depressa: and to distinguish
it from that low bushy shrub, the specific title of _depressa erecta_
was given to it, by which it is generally known in most
collections;--but as a depressed upright appears to us incongruous, we
have adopted that of foliacea, an unoccupied specific by which the plant
may be discriminated either in or out of bloom.

Our figure was made from the collection of Mr. Lee, in the summer of
1822.

[Illustration]




ERICA formosa, _bicolor_.


CHARACTER SPECIFICUS.

ERICA, antheris muticis, sub-inclusis; floribus sub apices ramorum
verticillatis; corollis clavatis, bicoloratis; foliis sparsis.


DESCRIPTIO.

CAULIS sesquipedalis vel bipedalis, erectus; rami pauci.

FOLIA subsena, linearia, obtusa, patentia, parùm curvata; petiolis
longis.

FLORES sub apices ramorum verticillati, axillares, et horizontales;
pedunculis brevibus bracteis tribus instructis; corolla clavata, longa,
parùm curvata, ad basin rubra, ad apicem flava; calycis foliolis
subovatis, adpressis.

GERMEN tiaræforme, sulcatum, ad basin nectariis melliferis instructum.

Habitat ad Caput Bonæ Spei.

Floret a mense Julii in Octobrem.


REFERENTIA.

1. Calyx.

2. Stamen unum, cum antherâ lente auctâ.

3. Germen et Pistillum, stigmate lente aucto.

4. Flos varietatis trivialis.

5. Flos varietatis obscurè coloratæ.

6. Flos varietatis sordidè coloratæ.


SPECIFIC CHARACTER.

HEATH, with beardless tips, just within the blossom; flowers grow in
whorls near the ends of the branches; blossom club-shaped, and
two-coloured; leaves scattered.


DESCRIPTION.

STEM a foot and a half or two feet high, upright; branches few.

LEAVES nearly by sixes, linear, blunt, spreading, and slightly curved;
footstalks long.

FLOWERS grow near the ends of the branches in whorls, from the axillæ of
the leaves, in a horizontal direction; peduncles short, and furnished
with three floral leaves; blossom club-shaped, long, and slightly
curved, red at the base, and yellow at the end; the leaflets of the cup
are nearly ovate, and pressed to the blossom.

SEED-BUD turban-shaped, furrowed, and furnished at the base with
honey-bearing nectaries.

Native of the Cape of Good Hope.

Flowers from the month of July till October.


REFERENCE.

1. The Empalement.

2. A Chive with a tip magnified.

3. Seed-bud and Pointal, summit magnified.

4. Flower of a slight variety.

5. Flower of a dull-coloured variety.

6. Flower of a dirty-coloured variety.


THE versatility that pervades this genus is particularly prominent in
this species, which appears allied to the E. formosa, grandiflora,
exsurgens, pinea, and also resembles in its general appearance many of
that beautiful section of the Erica family well known by the specific
appellation of vestita. Our figure was drawn, in the summer of 1807,
from plants in the nursery of Mr. Rollinson. The flowers given with the
dissections are mere florescent variations, no distinction being
observable in the plants when out of bloom; we have therefore deemed it
sufficient to represent only a flower of each of them.

[Illustration]




ERICA glomerata.


CHARACTER SPECIFICUS.

ERICA, antheris muticis, inclusis: flores ramos terminant in capitibus
aggregatis: foliis ternatis: ramis virgatis.


DESCRIPTIO.

CAULIS humilis: rami et ramuli filiformes, flexuosi.

FOLIA ternata, subulata, erecta, cauli adpressa.

FLORES terminales, capitibus aggregatis: corolla urceolata, incarnata:
calycis foliola magna, ovata, acuminata, colorata, erecta.

GERMEN tiaræforme, sulcatum, viride.

Habitat ad Caput Bonæ Spei.

Floret a mense Martii in Julium.


REFERENTIA.

1. Folium auctum.

2. Flos.

3. Calyx.

4. Antheræ et Pistillum, anthera una lente aucta.

5. Germen et Pistillum, stigmate lente aucto.

6. Germen lente auctum.

7. Involucrum.


SPECIFIC CHARACTER.

HEATH, with beardless tips, within the blossoms: flowers terminate the
branches in crowded heads: leaves by threes: branches twiggy.


DESCRIPTION.

STEM low: the small and large branches are thread-shaped, and flexuose.

LEAVES by threes, awl-shaped, upright, and pressed to the stem.

FLOWERS terminal, in crowded heads: blossom pitcher-shaped and
flesh-coloured: the leaflets of the empalement are large, egg-shaped,
pointed, coloured, and upright.

SEED-BUD turban-shaped, furrowed, and green.

Native of the Cape of Good Hope.

Flowers from May till July.


REFERENCE.

1. A leaf magnified.

2. A Flower.

3. The Empalement.

4. Chives and Pointal, one tip magnified.

5. Seed-bud and Pointal, summit magnified.

6. Seed-bud magnified.

7. The Involucrum.


THIS new species of Erica was raised at the Nursery of Mr. Rollinson, in
the summer of 1812, from seed brought from the Cape of Good Hope by Mr.
Niven. Our figure represents the entire (and we believe unique) plant of
six years growth. It is a handsome little shrub, in its foliage
resembling the E. _calycina_, but in every other particular very
different from any species we are yet acquainted with.

[Illustration]




ERICA grandinosa.


CHARACTER SPECIFICUS.

ERICA antheris aristatis, inclusis: floribus terminalibus: foliis
ternatis: caule fruticoso.


DESCRIPTIO.

CAULIS pedalis, virgatus, flexuosus, fruticosus: ramulis patentibus.

FOLIA terna, sub-trigona, obtusa, brevia, crassiuscula.

FLORES in apicibus ramulorum subterni, cernui: corolla campanulata,
parva, albida, et costata: laciniis oris revolutis: pedunculus pallide
carneus: calyx duplex, exteriori trifoliato, angustiori.

GERMEN tiaræforme, sulcatum, villosum, ad basin nectariis melliferis
instructum.

Habitat ad Caput Bonæ Spei.

Floret a mense Maii usque ad Julium.


REFERENTIA.

1. Folium lente auctum.

2. Calyx lente auctus.

3. Stamen unum, anthera lente aucta.

4. Germen et Pistillum, stigmate lente aucto.

5. Germen lente auctum.


SPECIFIC CHARACTER.

HEATH with bearded tips within the blossom: flowers terminal: leaves by
threes: stem shrubby.


DESCRIPTION.

STEM a foot high, twiggy, flexuous, and shrubby: smaller branches
spreading.

LEAVES by threes, nearly three-sided, obtuse, short, and thickish.

FLOWERS grow from the ends of the small branches, mostly by threes,
nodding: blossom bell-shaped, small, white, and ribbed: segments of the
mouth rolled back: peduncle of a pale flesh-colour: cup double, the
outer one three-leaved, and narrower.

SEED-BUD turban-shaped, furrowed, villose, and furnished at the base
with honey-bearing nectaries.

Native of the Cape of Good Hope.

Flowers from the month of May till July.


REFERENCE.

1. A Leaf magnified.

2. The Empalement magnified.

3. A Chive, summit magnified.

4. Seed-bud and Pointal, summit magnified.

5. Seed-bud magnified.


THE Erica grandinosa was sent us in the month of June 1824, amongst many
other new species, by Mr. Sinclair, from the splendid collection of his
Grace the Duke of Bedford, at Woburn Abbey. This is one of those
white-flowered Ericas so difficult to give a relief upon paper: it is a
delicate little Heath, and although deficient in speciosity, claims
attention as a perfectly new species, very distinct from any other
hitherto figured.

[Illustration]




ERICA Imperialis.


CHARACTER SPECIFICUS.

ERICA antheris aristatis, inclusis: floribus terminalibus,
speciosissimis: foliis tremulis, spiraliter sparsis, truncatis: ramis
simplicibus.


DESCRIPTIO.

CAULIS bipedalis, erectus: ramis et ramulis simplicibus, longis.

FOLIA plerumque sena, linearia, obtusa, attenuata in petiolos longos
capillares.

FLORES ramos terminant in verticillis simplicibus, patentibus, viscosis:
pedunculis longis, recurvatis: corolla cylindrico-clavata, longa: ima
parte profunde carnea, apice viridi, ore arctata, laciniis rectis.

GERMEN clavatum, sulcatum. Stylus filiformis, subinclusus. Stigma
peltatum, concavum.

Habitat ad Caput Bonæ Spei.

Floret a mense Novembri ad Januarium.


REFERENTIA.

1. Folium.

2. Calyx.

3. Stamina a Pistillo diducta, anthera una lente aucta.

4. Germen et Pistillum, stigmate lente aucto.

5. Germen lente auctum.


SPECIFIC CHARACTER.

HEATH with bearded tips, within the blossom: flowers terminal and showy:
leaves tremulous, spirally scattered, appearing cut off at the ends:
branches simple.


DESCRIPTION.

STEM two feet high, upright: the large and small branches simple and
long.

LEAVES mostly by sixes, linear, blunt, and tapering into long hair-like
footstalks.

FLOWERS terminate the branches in simple whorls, spreading and clammy:
footstalks long and recurved: blossom cylindrically club-shaped and
long: the lower part of a deep flesh-colour, the end green, compressed
at the mouth, whose segments are straight.

SEED-BUD club-shaped and furrowed. Shaft thread-shaped, and just within
the blossom: summit shield-shaped and hollow.

Native of the Cape of Good Hope.

Flowers from the month of November till January.


REFERENCE.

1. A Leaf.

2. The Empalement.

3. The Chives detached from the Pointal, one tip magnified.

4. Seed-bud and Pointal, one tip magnified.

5. Seed-bud magnified.


OUR figure represents a specimen from the conservatory of the Earl of
Northampton (in November 1818), the only plant we could find in bloom
for the last ten years. It is certainly less hardy than many of this
fine tribe, and requires a clearer atmosphere than is to be met with in
the vicinity of so large a city as London. It was first raised from Cape
seed in the collection of G. Hibbert, Esq. in 1806.

[Illustration]




ERICA infundibuliformis.


CHARACTER SPECIFICUS.

ERICA antheris superne bicornibus, inclusis: floribus terminalibus,
quaternis: longis tenuis foliis ternis: caulis gracilis.


DESCRIPTIO.

CAULIS fruticosus, debilis, pedalis et ultra: rami et ramuli filiformes
virgati.

FOLIA terna, linearia, obtusa, glabra, erecto, patentia.

FLORES ad apices ramulorum quaterni, pedunculis brevissimis, bracteis:
tribus subulatis instructis: corollis tubulosis longis tenuis rubris:
oris laciniis equalis patentes superne albis.

GERMEN tiaræforme, sulcatum, ad basin nectariis melliferis instructum.

Habitat ad Caput Bonæ Spei.

Floret a mense Augusti in Novembrem.


REFERENTIA.

1. Calyx.

2. Stamina et Pistillum, antherâ unâ lente auctâ.

3. Germen et Pistillum stigmate lente aucto.


SPECIFIC CHARACTER.

HEATH with tips two-horned on the upper part, within the blossom:
flowers terminal, grow by fours, long and slender: leaves by threes:
stem slender.


DESCRIPTION.

STEM shrubby, weak, a foot or more high: the small and large branches
are thread-shaped, and twiggy.

LEAVES by threes, linear, blunt, smooth, erect, and spreading.

FLOWERS grows by fours at the ends of the small branches: footstalks
very short, and furnished with three awl-shaped floral leaves: blossoms
tubular, long, slender, and of a red colour: segments of the border
spreading, equal and white on the upper surface.

SEED-BUD turban shaped, and furrowed, with honey bearing nectaries at
the base.

Native of the Cape of Good Hope.

Flowers from August till November.


REFERENCE.

1. The Empalement.

2. Chives and Pointal, one tip magnified.

3. Seed-bud and Pointal, summit magnified.


THIS fine species of Erica was raised from seed brought from the Cape of
Good Hope by Mr. Niven: it bears a considerable resemblance to the E.
tenuiflora, but differs in the specific character of its antheræ from
all those we have hitherto figured: for when they are bearded, crested,
or two-horned, those appendages have invariably been at the base, but in
this one instance, they are almost at the top of the anthers, instead of
the bottom.

It is a plant that flowers freely, and during the autumnal months makes
a most elegant appearance.

[Illustration]




ERICA Jasminiflora, _minor_.


CHARACTER SPECIFICUS.

ERICA, antheris muticis, inclusis: stylo sub-exerto: floribus
terminalibus: foliis ternis: ramulis numerosis.


DESCRIPTIO.

CAULIS fruticosus, pedalis, erecto-patens: ramis longis.

FOLIA terna, trigona, acuta, curvata, supra plana, subtus sulcata.

FLORES terminales, terni vel seni: corolla rubra, sesquipollicaris,
summa cylindrica, ad basin inflata, ore arctata: laciniis patentibus
acutis: pedunculis longis coloratis.

GERMEN tiaræforme, sulcatum, ad basin nectariis melliferis.

Habitat ad Caput Bonæ Spei.

Floret a mense Aprili in Junium.


REFERENTIA.

1. Stamina et Pistillum, stigmate lente aucto.

2. Germen et Pistillum, stigmate lente aucto.

3. Flos varietatis albæ.

4. Flos varietatis striatæ.


SPECIFIC CHARACTER.

HEATH, with beardless tips within the blossoms: shaft just without:
flowers terminal: leaves by threes: branches numerous.


DESCRIPTION.

STEM shrubby, a foot high, between erect and spreading: branches long.

LEAVES by threes, three-sided, pointed and curved, flat on their upper
surface, and furrowed beneath.

FLOWERS terminate the branches in threes or sixes: blossoms red, an inch
and a half long, the upper part cylindrical, swelled at the base, and
contracted at the mouth: segments spreading and pointed: footstalks long
and coloured.

SEED-BUD turban-shaped and furrowed, with honey-bearing nectaries at the
base.

Native of the Cape of Good Hope.

Flowers from the month of April till June.


REFERENCE.

1. The Chives and Pointal, one tip magnified.

2. Seed-bud and Pointal, summit magnified.

3. Flower of a white variety.

4. Flower of a striped variety.


OUR figure represents a plant raised from seed in 1807 in the collection
of the Hon. W. Irby, where we also found, at the same time, a variation
with white flowers; and in the conservatory of the Countess de Vandes
this year, 1811, observed another variety, the blossoms of which were
elegantly striped in the tube: we have therefore added a flower of each
variety to our dissections, as all the three plants were so very much
like each other in every other particular, that we could not distinguish
one from the other when out of bloom.

[Illustration]




ERICA Lawsonia.


CHARACTER SPECIFICUS.

ERICA antheris muticis, inclusis: foliis quaternis: corollis
tubæformibus: caule humili, fruticoso.


DESCRIPTIO.

CAULIS pygmæus: ramis et ramulis filiformibus, virgatis.

FOLIA quaterna, linearia, acuta, erecto-patentia.

FLORES in medio ramorum, sparsi: pedunculis brevibus.

COROLLA rubra, tubæformis, tenuissima: oris laciniis acuminatis,
patentibus.

GERMEN tiaræforme, sulcatum.

Habitat ad Caput Bonæ Spei.

Floret a Mense Junio ad Augustum.


REFERENTIA.

1. Folium lente auctum.

2. Calyx lente auctus.

3. Stamina a Pistillo diducta, anthera una lente aucta.

4. Germen et Pistillum, stigmate lente aucto.

5. Germen lente auctum.


SPECIFIC CHARACTER.

HEATH with beardless tips, within the blossom: leaves by fours: blossom
trumpet-shaped: stem low and shrubby.


DESCRIPTION.

A DWARF SHRUB: the small and large branches thread-shaped and twiggy.

LEAVES by fours, linear, pointed, and between erect and spreading.

FLOWERS grow about the middle of the branches, scattered: footstalks
short.

BLOSSOM red, trumpet-shaped, and very slender: segments of the border
are sharp-pointed and spreading.

SEED-BUD turban-shaped and furrowed.

Native of the Cape of Good Hope.

Flowers from June till August.


REFERENCE.

1. The Leaf magnified.

2. The Empalement magnified.

3. The Chives detached from the Pointal, one tip magnified.

4. Seed-bud and Pointal, one tip magnified.

5. Seed-bud magnified.


THIS elegant dwarf shrub was named after the late Sir Wilfrid Lawson,
Bart. Our figure was drawn in the summer of 1818 from a plant four years
old; and if we can judge from the appearance of those plants we have
seen in different collections, it will continue to be, as it is at
present, slow in growth and low in stature.

[Illustration]




ERICA Linnæa superba.


CHARACTER SPECIFICUS.

ERICA antheris muticis, inclusis: floribus pilosis, pellucidis: foliis
quaternis: caule erecto, fruticoso.


DESCRIPTIO.

CAULIS bipedalis, fruticosus, erectus: ramulis numerosis, brevibus,
pilosis.

FOLIA quaterna, linearia, villis brevissimis, adscendentia.

FLORES ramulos terminant, formantes spicam longam: corolla clavata,
leviter curvata, unciali, pilosa, pellucida, ore albo inflata, ad basin
cylindrica et purpurea: laciniis erecto-patentibus et revolutis.

GERMEN tiaræforme, sulcatum, ad basin nectariis melliferis instructum.

Habitat ad Caput Bonæ Spei.

Floret per menses Maii, Junii, et Julii.


REFERENTIA.

1. Folium lente auctum.

2. Calyx.

3. Stamen, anthera una lente aucta.

4. Germen et Pistillum, stigmate lente aucto.

5. Germen lente auctum.


SPECIFIC CHARACTER.

HEATH with beardless tips within the blossom: flowers hairy and
transparent: leaves by fours: stem upright, and shrubby.


DESCRIPTION.

Stem two feet high, shrubby, upright: the smaller branches numerous,
short, and hairy.

LEAVES by fours, linear, with very short hairs, and ascending.

FLOWERS terminate the smaller branches, forming a long spike: blossom
club-shaped, slightly curved, an inch long, hairy and transparent, white
and swelled at the mouth, cylindrical and purple at the base: segments
of the border between erect, spreading, and revolute.

SEED-BUD turban-shaped, furrowed, and furnished at the base with
honey-bearing nectaries.

Native of the Cape of Good Hope.

Flowers during the months of May, June, and July.


REFERENCE.

1. A Leaf magnified.

2. The Empalement.

3. A Chive, one tip magnified.

4. Seed-bud and Pointal, summit magnified.

5. Seed-bud magnified.


This fine plant has ornamented various collections for the last five or
six years. In growth it is luxuriant, as we have frequently seen it two
feet high, with numerous long flowering branches, at Covent-Garden,
amongst many of the most beautiful (if not most rare) Ericas, which are
exclusively cultivated for that well-known emporium. It may certainly be
considered as one of the finest variations of _Erica Linnæa_, and as
such its hyperbolical specific title may serve to distinguish it from
most of the varieties.

[Illustration]




ERICA magnifica.


CHARACTER SPECIFICUS.

ERICA, antheris bicornibus, inclusis: floribus metulæformibus,
purpureis, nitidis: foliis ternis: ramis confertis: caule humili.


DESCRIPTIO.

FRUTEX pygmæus, ramis et ramulis numerosis confertis.

FOLIA ternata, linearia, obtusa, recta, subtùs leviter sulcata,
marginibus rotundatis.

FLORES plerumque ternati, patentes, aut cernui: pedunculi colorati,
bracteis tribus instructi: corolla metulæformis, purpurea, lucida: oris
laciniis erectis: calycis foliolis ovato-acutis, adpressis.

GERMEN tiaræforme, bicoloratum, ad basin nectariis melliferis
instructum.

Habitat ad Caput Bonæ Spei.

Floret a mense Augusti in Novembrem.


REFERENTIA.

1. Calyx.

2. Stamina a Pistillo diducta, antherâ unâ lente auctâ.

3. German et Pistillum, stigmate lente aucto.


SPECIFIC CHARACTER.

HEATH, with tips two-horned at the base, within the blossom: flowers
skittle-shaped, purple, and shining: leaves by threes; branches crowded
together: stem low.


DESCRIPTION.

A DWARF shrub, with numerous large and small branches crowded together.

LEAVES by threes, linear, blunt-ended and straight, slightly furrowed
beneath, and rounded on the edges.

FLOWERS grow mostly by threes, spreading or nodding: footstalks
coloured, and furnished with three floral leaves: blossom
skittle-shaped, purple, and shining: segments of the border upright:
leaflets of the cup ovate, pointed, and pressed to the blossom.

SEED-BUD turban-shaped, two-coloured, and furnished at the base with
honey-bearing nectaries.

Native of the Cape of Good Hope.

Flowers from August till November.


REFERENCE.

1. The Empalement.

2. The Chives detached from the Pointal, one tip magnified.

3. Seed-bud and Pointal, summit magnified.


THIS Erica is a handsome bushy shrub, but certainly not magnificent,
although, when first introduced in the year 1800, its claim to the
specific title of magnifica was undoubtedly more appropriate than it now
appears to be amongst the numerous species (and many of superior beauty)
raised since that period from Cape seed. It is at present in but few
collections; which is probably owing to its being of slow growth, and
not easily increased. The only fine flowering plants we have seen lately
have been in the conservatory of the Countess de Vandes, and at the
nursery of Mr. Williams, whence our figure was taken.

[Illustration]




ERICA minutæflora.


CHARACTER SPECIFICUS.

ERICA antheris muticis, subinclusis: stylo exerto: summitate magna,
concava: floribus parvis, axillaribus: foliis quaternis: caule
fruticoso.


DESCRIPTIO.

CAULIS pedalis et ultra, erectus, flexuosus: ramulis verticillatis,
adscendentibus, filiformibus.

FLORES in summis ramulorum paniculati, plerumque bini, axillares;
corolla campanulata, purpurea, minuta: calyce adpresso.

FOLIA quaterna, linearia, longa, obtusa, glauca, et patentia.

GERMEN tiaræforme, sulcatum, tomentosum, ad basin nectariis melliferis
instructum.

Habitat ad Caput Bonæ Spei.

Floret per menses autumnales.


REFERENTIA.

1. Flores duo.

2. Calyx lente auctus.

3. Flos lente auctus.

4. Germen et Pistillum, stigmate lente aucto.

5. Germen lente auctum.


SPECIFIC CHARACTER.

HEATH with beardless tips just within the blossom: shaft without: summit
large and hollow: flowers small, axillary: leaves by fours: stem
shrubby.


DESCRIPTION.

STEM a foot or more high, upright, and flexuose: the smaller branches
grow in whorls, ascending, and thread-shaped.

FLOWERS grow in loose spikes near the ends of the branches, mostly in
twos, from the axillæ of the leaves: blossom bell-shaped, purple, and
very small: empalement pressed to them.

LEAVES by fours, linear, long, blunt-ended, glaucous, and spreading.

SEED-BUD turban-shaped, furrowed, downy, and furnished at the base with
honey-bearing nectaries.

Native of the Cape of Good Hope.

Flowers during the autumnal months.


REFERENCE.

1. Two flowers.

2. Empalement magnified.

3. A Flower magnified.

4. Seed-bud and Pointal, summit magnified.

5. The Seed-bud magnified.


This very small-flowered Erica was first raised at the Hammersmith
Nursery, from Cape seed, in the summer of 1822, and was then called
_atro_ or _viridi purpurea_, neither of which are characteristic of the
plant, which furnishes when in bloom a very minute but good specific
character; and although not specious, it may be regarded as a curious
and interesting species.

[Illustration]




ERICA mirabilis.


CHARACTER SPECIFICUS.

ERICA, antheris muticis, inclusis: floribus sub-sessilibus,
terminalibus: foliis quaternis: caulis fruticosus.


DESCRIPTIO.

CAULIS pedalis: ramuli numerosi, erecto-patentes.

FOLIA quaterna, linearia, obtusa, glabra.

FLORES subsessiles, terminates, fastigiati, quaterni: corolla
ventricosa, imprimis alba, denique rosacea: ore arctato: laciniis
cordatis, undulatis, expansis, maximis.

GERMEN tiaræforme, sulcatum, villosum, ad basin nectariis melliferis
instructum.

Habitat ad Caput Bonæ Spei.

Floret a mense Junii ad Septembrem.


REFERENTIA.

1. Calyx.

2. Stamina a pistillo diducta, anthera una lente aucta.

3. Germen et pistillum stigmate lente aucto.


SPECIFIC CHARACTER.

HEATH, with beardless tips, within the blossom: flowers nearly sessile
and terminal: leaves by fours: stem shrubby.


DESCRIPTION.

STEM a foot high: the smaller branches numerous, between erect and
spreading.

LEAVES by fours, linear, blunt and smooth.

FLOWERS nearly sessile, terminal, in bunches of four together: blossom
swelled out, white at first, but dying off a rose-colour: narrowed at
the mouth: segments of the border heart-shaped, waved, spreading and
large.

SEED-BUD turban-shaped, furrowed, hairy, and furnished at the base with
honey-bearing nectaries.

Native of the Cape of Good Hope.

Flowers from the month of June to September.


REFERENCE.

1. The Empalement.

2. The Chives and Pointal, one tip magnified.

3. Seed-bud and Pointal, summit magnified.


THE Erica mirabilis may be considered as an intermediate species between
the Ericas Walkeria and Hyacinthoides, removed from each and yet allied
to both. When in perfection, the inner segments of the blossoms are of a
pure white, but on going off may justly be said to blush themselves out
of bloom. Our figure was made from the nursery of Messrs. Rollinsons at
Lower Tooting, in the summer of 1824.

[Illustration]




ERICA mollis.


CHARACTER SPECIFICUS.

ERICA, antheris aristatis, inclusis: floribus in umbellis axillaribus,
globosis, pilosis: foliis quaternis: caule fruticoso.


DESCRIPTIO.

CAULIS pedalis, fruticosus, erectus; ramulis adscendentibus.

FOLIA quaterna, linearia, obtusa, pilosa, patentia, supra plana, subtus
sulcata.

FLORES in umbellis, axillares; corolla globosa, purpurea, pilosa:
laciniis rotundatis, patentibus, æqualibus.

Habitat ad Caput Bonæ Spei.

Floret a mense Julio in Septembrem.


REFERENTIA.

1. Folium lente auctum.

2. Calyx lente auctus.

3. Anthera una lente aucta.

4. Germen et Pistillum, stigmate lente aucto.

5. Germen lente auctum.


SPECIFIC CHARACTER.

HEATH, with bearded tips, within the blossom: flowers grow in umbels
from the axillæ of the leaves, globular, and hairy: leaves by fours:
stem shrubby.


DESCRIPTION.

STEM a foot high, shrubby and upright: branches ascending.

LEAVES by fours, linear, obtuse, hairy, and spreading, flat on their
upper surface and furrowed beneath.

FLOWERS grow in umbels from the axillæ of the leaves: blossom globular,
purple, and hairy: segments of the border rounded, spreading, and equal.

Native of the Cape of Good Hope.

Flowers from the month of July till September.


REFERENCE.

1. A Leaf magnified.

2. The Empalement magnified.

3. One Chive magnified.

4. Seed-bud and Pointal, summit magnified.

5. Seed-bud magnified.


THE Erica mollis is a compact little shrub, with lively purple flowers:
both flowers and leaves are covered with short hairs, which give it a
soft appearance, although to the touch the hairs are more hispid than
downy. Our figure is from a plant at Mr. Lee’s Nursery.

[Illustration]




ERICA moschata.


CHARACTER SPECIFICUS.

ERICA, antheris muticis, inclusis: floribus campanulatis, pendulis,
odoratis, terminalibus: foliis ternis, obtusis, odorem quasi moschatum
spirantibus: caule erecto.


DESCRIPTIO.

CAULIS fruticosus, erectus, pedalis et ultra; rami graciles.

FOLIA terna, linearia, obtusa, supra sub-plana, subtus læviter sulcata,
quasi moschum redolentia.

FLORES plerumque terni, penduli; pedunculi colorati, bracteis tribus;
corolla campanulata, odorata, incarnata; calycis foliolis lato-ovatis,
adpressis.

GERMEN tiaræforme, sulcatum, ad basin nectariis melliferis instructum.

Habitat ad Caput Bonæ Spei.

Floret a mense Maio in Augustum.


REFERENTIA.

1. Calyx lente auctus.

2. Corolla.

3. Stamen auctum.

4. Germen et Pistillum, stigmate lente aucto.

5. Germen auctum.

6. Ramus varietatis minoris.


SPECIFIC CHARACTER.

HEATH, with beardless tips, within the blossom: flowers bell-shaped,
pendulous, scented, and terminal: leaves by threes, obtuse, and scented
like musk: stem upright.


DESCRIPTION.

STEM shrubby, upright, a foot or more high; branches slender.

LEAVES by threes, linear, and obtuse, nearly flat on the upper surface,
lightly furrowed beneath, and scented like musk.

FLOWERS mostly by threes, pendulous; footstalks coloured, with three
floral leaves; blossom bell-shaped, scented, and flesh-coloured;
leaflets of the cup are broadly ovate, and pressed to the blossom.

Seed-bud turban-shaped, furrowed, and furnished at the base with
honey-bearing nectaries.

Native of the Cape of Good Hope.

Flowers from the month of May till August.


REFERENCE.

1. The Empalement magnified.

2. A Blossom.

3. A Chive magnified.

4. Seed-bud and Pointal, summit magnified.

5. Seed-bud magnified.

6. Branch of a small variety.


SEVERAL species of the Ericæ are fragrant in the flowers; but not any
that we know of possess a scented foliage, except the one now figured,
whose leaves emit a delicate odour resembling musk; and very few
references to scent will, we think, be found so unequivocal; if the ends
of the branches are gently rubbed, or lightly passed through the hands,
the fragrance is stronger. First raised at the Clapham Gardens in 1805,
and at present, we believe, in few collections; but will doubtless soon
find a place in many, as its flowers are handsome, fragrant, and remain
during the summer months; and the perfume of its leaves lasts all the
year.

[Illustration]




ERICA mundula.


CHARACTER SPECIFICUS.

ERICA, antheris muticis, inclusis: foliis quaternis: floribus
sessilibus, fastigiatis, terminalibus: frutex pygmæus.


DESCRIPTIO.

CAULIS fruticosus, spithamæus, erectus, ramosus: ramuli numerosi,
adscendentes.

FOLIA quaterna, subulata, lucida, supra plana, subtus sulcata.

FLORES sessiles, erecti, fastigiati, quaterni, terminales: corollis
tubulosis, pellucidis, ore arctato, quod ornatum est in modum Primulæ:
laciniis cordatis, expansis, albis, subtus læte rubris.

Habitat ad Caput Bonæ Spei.

Floret a mense Junio ad Septembrem.


REFERENTIA.

1. Calyx.

2. Anthera lente aucta.

3. Germen et Pistillum, stigmate lente aucto.

4. Germen lente auctum.


SPECIFIC CHARACTER.

HEATH, with beardless tips, within the blossom: leaves by fours: flowers
sessile, fastigiate, and terminal: a dwarf shrub.


DESCRIPTION.

STEM shrubby, a span high, upright, and bushy: small branches numerous
and ascending.

LEAVES by fours, awl-shaped, shining, flat on their upper surface, and
furrowed beneath.

FLOWERS sessile, upright, fastigiate, and terminating the branches by
fours: blossoms tubular, pellucid, narrowed at the mouth, which is
ornamented like a Cowslip: the segments of the border are heart-shaped,
spreading, and white, of a bright red on the under side.

Native of the Cape of Good Hope.

Flowers from the month of June till September.


REFERENCE.

1. Empalement.

2. A Chive magnified.

3. The Seed-bud and Pointal, summit magnified.

4. Seed-bud magnified.


THE Erica mundula is a small neat shrub resembling the E. primuloides in
its flowers, but different in the leaves, which are by fours instead of
fives; it is also a looser-growing plant, and seems to be a connecting
link between that species, the E. infundibuliformis, E. tenuiflora, and
E. Coventrya, but very distinct from either of them. The flowers in the
early bud state have a very rich appearance, from the deep bright red
colour beneath the segments of the border, contrasted with the dark
shining green leaves. Our drawing represents an entire plant, from the
Hammersmith collection.

[Illustration]




ERICA nivalis.


CHARACTER SPECIFICUS.

ERICA, antheris aristatis, inclusis: foliis ternatis: floribus albis,
terminalibus.


DESCRIPTIO.

CAULIS fruticosus, pedalis et ultra, erectus, ramosus.

FOLIA ternata, linearia, obtusa, parva, glabra, recta.

FLORES ramulos terminant, plerumque terni, subcernui: corolla globosa,
alba, pilis pubescentibus tecta.

Habitat ad Caput Bonæ Spei.

Floret a mense Aprili in Junium.


REFERENTIA.

1. Calyx lente auctus.

2. Anthera una lente aucta.

3. Germen et Pistillum, stigmate lente aucto.

4. Germen lente auctum.


SPECIFIC CHARACTER.

HEATH, with bearded tips, within the blossom: leaves by threes: flowers
white and terminal.


DESCRIPTION.

STEM shrubby, a foot or more high, upright and bushy.

LEAVES by threes, linear, blunt, small, smooth and straight.

FLOWERS terminate the smaller branches mostly by threes, nearly
drooping: blossom globular, white, and covered with soft hairs.

Native of the Cape of Good Hope.

Flowers from the month of April till June.


REFERENCE.

1. The Empalement magnified.

2. A Chive magnified.

3. Seed-bud and Pointal, summit magnified.

4. Seed-bud magnified.


The Erica nivalis is a perfectly new species, and very distinct from any
of the numerous species at present in cultivation with us. Our drawing
was made at the Hammersmith Nursery in May 1820. It is with difficulty
increased by cuttings.

[Illustration]




ERICA Ollula.


CHARACTER SPECIFICUS.

ERICA, antheris aristatis, tortis, inclusis: flores ramos terminant in
fasciculis: foliis sparsis.


DESCRIPTIO.

CAULIS subpedalis, fruticosus: ramis longis, adscendentibus.

FOLIA sparsa, linearia, longa, obtusa: petiolis longis, adpressis.

FLORES conferti, fasciculati, terminales: pedunculis longissimis,
rubris, bracteis duabus distantibus: corolla urceolata, saturate carnea:
oriis laciniis æqualibus, patentibus.

GERMEN tiaræforme, sulcatum, ad basin nectariis melliferis instructum.

Habitat ad Caput Bonæ Spei.

Floret a mense Julii ad Octobrem.


REFERENTIA.

1. Calyx.

2. Corolla.

3. Antheræ et Pistillum, anthera una lente aucta.

4. Germen et Pistillum, stigmate lente aucto.

5. Germen lente auctum.


SPECIFIC CHARACTER.

HEATH, with twisted, bearded tips within the blossom: flowers terminate
the branches in bunches: leaves scattered.


DESCRIPTION.

STEM scarce a foot high, shrubby: branches long and ascending.

LEAVES scattered, linear, long, and blunt-ended: footstalks pressed to
the branches.

FLOWERS crowded together in bunches at the ends of the branches:
footstalks very long and red, with two floral-leaves set at a distance
on them: blossom pitcher-shaped, and of a deep flesh-colour: segments of
the border equal and spreading.

SEED-BUD turban-shaped, furrowed, and furnished at the base with
honey-bearing nectaries.

Native of the Cape of Good Hope.

Flowers from the month of July till October.


REFERENCE.

1. The Empalement.

2. A Blossom.

3. The Chives and Pointal, one tip magnified.

4. Seed-bud and Pointal, summit magnified.

5. Seed-bud magnified.


THIS handsome little shrub was, we believe, first raised from Cape seed
about the year 1814. It is one of the most ornamental of those Ericas
recently introduced. The flowers are crowded together in bunches, and
remain a long time in successive bloom.

[Illustration]




ERICA pedunculata.


CHARACTER SPECIFICUS.

ERICA, antheris aristatis, inclusis: floribus terminalibus: pedunculis
longissimis: foliis sparsis, pilosis.


DESCRIPTIO.

CAULIS pedalis et ultra: ramis longis, divaricatis, foliis vestitis.

FLORES, in umbellis terminalibus, cernui: pedunculis longissimis,
rubris, lucidis: corolla globoso-campanulata, pallide purpurea.

GERMEN tiaræforme, sulcatum.

Habitat ad Caput Bonæ Spei.

Floret a mense Martii in Julium.


REFERENTIA.

1. Calyx.

2. Anthera una lente aucta.

3. Germen lente auctum.


SPECIFIC CHARACTER.

HEATH, with bearded tips, within the blossom: flowers terminal:
footstalks very long: leaves scattered, and hairy.


DESCRIPTION.

STEM a foot or more high; branches long, straggling, and clothed with
leaves.

FLOWERS grow in terminal umbels, nodding: footstalks very long, red, and
shining; blossom globularly bell-shaped, of a pale purple colour.

SEED-BUD turban-shaped, and furrowed.

Native of the Cape of Good Hope.

Flowers from March till July.


REFERENCE.

1. The Empalement.

2. One Tip magnified.

3. The Seed-bud magnified.


THIS fine species of Erica was introduced from the Cape of Good Hope to
the gardens of G. Hibbert, Esq. in the summer of 1806. Our figure
represents about one half of the plant, which being unique, the wish to
increase it caused its destruction, as more cuttings were taken from it
than its high state of inflorescence could endure; and although all
possible care was taken to preserve the young plants, not one of them
survived the winter.

[Illustration]




ERICA pellucida _rubra_.


CHARACTER SPECIFICUS.

ERICA, antheris muticis, inclusis: stylo exerto: foliis quaternis:
floribus terminalibus: caule fruticoso.


DESCRIPTIO.

CAULIS fruticosus, pedalis et ultra, ramis numerosis filiformibus.

FOLIA quaterna, horizontaliter patentia, brevia, sub-linearia, obtusa,
marginibus hispidis.

FLORES in ramis terminalibus unus vel quatuor, cernui: corolla clavata,
curvata, rubella.

GERMEN tiaræforme, sulcatum, ad basin nectariis melliferis instructum.

Habitat ad Caput Bonæ Spei.

Floret a mense Augusti ad Novembrem.


REFERENTIA.

1. Stamina a Pistillo diducta, anthera una lente aucta.

2. Germen et Pistillum, stigmate lente aucto.

3. Varietates floribus intermediis.


SPECIFIC CHARACTER.

HEATH, with beardless tips, within the blossom: shaft without: leaves
grow by fours: flowers terminal: stem shrubby.


DESCRIPTION.

STEM shrubby, a foot or more high, with numerous thread-shaped branches.

LEAVES by fours, spreading horizontally, short, nearly linear,
blunt-ended, with bristly margins.

FLOWERS terminate the branches in one to four flowers, nodding: blossom
club-shaped, curved, and of a reddish colour.

SEED-BUD turban-shaped, furrowed, and furnished at the base with
honey-bearing nectaries.

Native of the Cape of Good Hope.

Flowers from the month of August till November.


REFERENCE.

1. The Chives and Pointal, one tip magnified.

2. Seed-bud and Pointal, summit magnified.

3. Intermediate flower varieties.


THIS Erica varies considerably from the original species, and yet
retains the leading feature of transparency that designates the mother
plant. The flowers given with the dissections are from plants nearly
allied to the white-flowered _pellucida_; and had we been then in
possession of them, they would have arranged better with that figure;
but this opportunity admits of their being made use of as intermediate
varieties of flower only.

Our drawing was taken at the Hammersmith nursery in 1816, where it was
first raised from seed.

[Illustration]




ERICA peltata.


CHARACTER SPECIFICUS.

ERICA antheris muticis, subexsertis: stylo exserto, filiformi: stigmate
peltato, magno: floribus axillaribus, terminalibus: foliis ternis: ramis
numerosis: caule erecto.


DESCRIPTIO.

CAULIS subpedalis: rami et ramuli numerosi, filiformes, adscendentes.

FOLIA terna, erecto-patentia, linearia, recta, obtusa.

FLORES axillares, terminales: pedunculi longi, bracteis calyci
adpressis: corolla campanulata, parva, carnea, subcernua: stylo
filiformi, longo: stigmate peltato, magno.

Habitat ad Caput Bonæ Spei.

Floret a mense Julii in Octobrem.


REFERENTIA.

1. Calyx lente auctus.

2. Corolla lente aucta.

3. Stamina lente aucta.

4. Germen et Pistillum, stigmate lente aucto.

5. Germen lente auctum.


SPECIFIC CHARACTER.

HEATH, with beardless tips, just without the blossom: shaft without,
thread-shaped: summit shield-shaped and large: flowers grow from the
axillæ of the leaves, and terminate the branches: leaves by threes:
branches numerous: stem upright.


DESCRIPTION.

STEM nearly a foot high: the large and small branches are numerous,
thread-shaped, and ascending.

LEAVES by threes, between erect and spreading, linear, straight and
obtuse.

FLOWERS grow from the axillæ of the leaves, and terminate the branches:
peduncles long, with floral leaves pressed to the cup: blossom
bell-shaped, small, flesh-coloured, and nearly nodding: shaft
thread-shaped and long: summit shield-shaped and large.

Native of the Cape of Good Hope.

Flowers from the month of July till October.


REFERENCE.

1. The Empalement magnified.

2. A Blossom magnified.

3. The Chives magnified.

4. Seed-bud and Pointal, summit magnified.

5. Seed-bud magnified.


IN the Genus Erica it is sometimes very difficult to find an appropriate
or unoccupied specific title. This little shrub furnishes no less than
four to choose from: this choice has already given the additional title
of _exserta_ to that of _peltata_, from the trivial circumstance of the
pointals protruding a little more in some plants than others: a mere
casualty, probably depending on its strength or culture. The flowers are
so very minute, that the pointals are the most conspicuous, resembling
shields in miniature. The anthers are large, compared to the small size
of the flowers, and so fertile, that when in full bloom if shaken, they
emit such a quantity of pollen as would afford the specific titles of
fertilis or farinosa.

Our drawing was made at Mr. Lee’s last summer (1823); but we have seen
it in bloom as long ago as 1806.

[Illustration]




ERICA perspicua.


CHARACTER SPECIFICUS.

ERICA, antheris muticis, inclusis: floribus cylindricis, villosis,
ramulos terminantibus: foliis ternis, linearibus.


DESCRIPTIO.

CAULIS fruticosus, sesquipedalis, erectus, et patens: ramuli numerosi.

FOLIA terna, linearia, subtus sulcata: petiolis longis, adpressis.

FLORES terni, ramulos terminantes: pedunculi colorati, bracteis duabus
parvis adpressis: corolla cylindracea et pilosa, ad basin purpurea, et
superne alba; laciniis ovatis, patentibus: calycis foliolis lanceolatis,
adpressis.

GERMEN tiaræforme, sulcatum, ad basin nectariis melliferis instructum.

Habitat ad Caput Bonæ Spei.

Floret a mense Aprili in Novembrem.


REFERENTIA.

1. Calyx.

2. Stamina et Pistillum.

3. Germen et Pistillum, stigmate lente aucto.


SPECIFIC CHARACTER.

HEATH, with beardless tips within the blossom: flowers cylindrical,
hairy, and terminating the small branches: leaves by threes, linear.


DESCRIPTION.

STEM shrubby, a foot and a half high, upright, and spreading: smaller
branches numerous.

LEAVES by threes, linear, furrowed beneath, with longish footstalks
pressed to the branches.

FLOWERS terminate the smaller branches by threes: peduncles coloured,
with two small floral leaves pressed to them: blossom cylindrical and
hairy, purple at the base, and white at the upper part: segments of the
border ovate and spreading: leaves of the empalement lance-shaped, and
pressed to the blossom.

SEED-BUD turban-shaped, furrowed, and furnished with honey-bearing
nectaries at the base.

Native of the Cape of Good Hope.

Flowers from the month of April till November.


REFERENCE.

1. The Empalement.

2. Chives and Pointal.

3. Seed-bud and Pointal, summit magnified.


THIS elegant plant resembles the E. Linnæa, and is by most cultivators
as well known by the appellation of the old Linneoides as by the
specific title of perspicua.

It flowers early in spring, and continues in successive bloom till late
in autumn. It was first raised from Cape seed in the Royal gardens at
Kew, and flowered in the nursery of Mr. Williams at Turnham Green about
the year 1796.

Our figure was taken from a luxuriant specimen in the summer of 1807.

[Illustration]




ERICA Plukenetia, _albens_.


CHARACTER SPECIFICUS.

ERICA, antheris muticis, exertis, longissimis: floribus pendentibus:
foliis ternis, fasciculatis.


DESCRIPTIO.

CAULIS erectus, sesquipedalis, fruticosus: rami subsimplices, ramulis
brevissimis tecti.

FOLIA terna, fasciculata, linearia, arcuata, acuta, glabra.

FLORES subsolitarii, pendentes a ramulis, in medio ramorum crescentes,
et spicam laxam formantes: pedunculis longis, bracteis tribus minutis ad
basin instructis: corolla conica, exalbida, laciniis erectis.

GERMEN tiaræforme, sulcatum, ad basin nectariis melliferis instructum.

Habitat ad Caput Bonæ Spei.

Floret a mense Maii in Septembrem.


REFERENTIA.

1. Calyx.

2. Stamina et Pistillum.

3. Germen et Pistillum, stigmate lente aucto.

4. Germen lente auctum.

5. Flos varietatis magnæ.


SPECIFIC CHARACTER.

HEATH, with beardless tips, without the blossom, and very long: flowers
hanging down: leaves by threes, bundled together.


DESCRIPTION.

STEM upright, a foot and a half high, shrubby: the large branches nearly
simple, and covered with numerous small branches.

LEAVES by threes, bundled together, linear, bowed, pointed, and smooth.

FLOWERS nearly solitary, hanging down from the small branches, growing
near the middle of the large branches, and forming a loose spike:
footstalks long, and furnished at the base with three small floral
leaves: blossom conical and whitish: segments of the border upright.

SEED-BUD turban-shaped, furrowed, and furnished at the base with
honey-bearing nectaries.

Native of the Cape of Good Hope.

Flowers from May till September.


REFERENCE.

1. The Empalement.

2. Chives and Pointal.

3. Seed-bud Pointal, summit magnified.

4. Seed-bud magnified.

5. Flower of a large variety.


THE flowers of this Erica possess a negative sort of colour, that forms
a good contrast to the purply red of the other species of Plukenetia,
but when out of flower it is not easily distinguished from them. Our
drawing was made from the Hibbertian collection. We are doubtful whether
the plant is not at present lost to us, not having seen it for several
years. We have long ago figured it in the octavo work, and should have
then published it in our folio edition; but wished to give a fine
specimen of the large-flowered variety in preference. We have not,
however, seen one plant of it since, except that from which the gigantic
flower in the dissection was taken at Mr. Rollinson’s Nursery at Lower
Tooting, which was rich in foliage, but had scarcely any blossoms.

[Illustration]




ERICA præstans.


CHARACTER SPECIFICUS.

ERICA, antheris muticis, inclusis: stylo sub-exerto: floribus
urceolatis, terminalibus: foliis quaternis.


DESCRIPTIO.

CAULIS pedalis, erectus, ramosus: rami et ramuli graciles.

FOLIA quaterna, linearia, erecta, obtusa.

FLORES terminales, in umbellis quaternis vel octonis: pedunculis
brevibus: corollis urceolatis, albis: laciniis magnis, expansis.

GERMEN tiaræforme, sulcatum, ad basin nectariis melliferis instructum.

Habitat ad Caput Bonæ Spei.

Floret a mense Junii in Novembrem.


REFERENTIA.

1. Calyx.

2. Stamina et Pistillum.

3. Stamina et Pistillum, anthera una lente aucta.

4. Germen et Pistillum, stigmate lente aucto.


SPECIFIC CHARACTER.

HEATH, with beardless tips, within the blossom: shaft just without:
flowers pitcher-shaped and terminal: leaves by fours.


DESCRIPTION.

STEM a foot high, upright, shrubby: large and small branches slender.

LEAVES by fours, linear, upright, and blunt-ended.

FLOWERS terminate the branches in umbels of four to eight: footstalks
short: blossom pitcher-shaped, and white: segments of the border large
and spreading.

SEED-BUD turban-shaped, furrowed, and furnished with honey-bearing
nectaries at the base.

Native of the Cape of Good Hope.

Flowers from June till November.


REFERENCE.

1. The Empalement.

2. The Chives and Pointal.

3. The Chives and Pointal, one tip magnified.

4. Seed-bud and Pointal, summit magnified.


THIS Erica, although a distinct species, does not possess any prominent
feature sufficient to distinguish it from many others; we have therefore
retained the specific title of præstans (by which it is known to some
cultivators), although it is an appellation to which the plant has but
little claim compared with the numerous beautiful species of which this
very extensive Genus is composed. It was first raised from seed brought
from the Cape of Good Hope by Mr. Niven. It flowers from the end of
spring till late in autumn.

[Illustration]




ERICA pumila.


CHARACTER SPECIFICUS.

ERICA, antheris cristatis, inclusis: floribus cylindraceis,
terminalibus, bicoloribus: foliis ternis, obtusis: ramis divaricatis:
caule humili.


DESCRIPTIO.

FRUTEX pygmæus, rami et ramuli numerosi, divaricati, plerumque foliis
tecti.

FOLIA ternata, linearia, obtusa, recta, glabra, supra plana, subtus
sulcata, marginibus rotundatis.

FLORES plerumque ternata, patento-cernui; pedunculi breves, colorati,
bracteis tribus coloratis instructi; corolla cylindracea, incarnata;
laciniis oris viridibus, pallidis, erectis; calycis foliolis ovatis,
coloratis, adpressis.

GERMEN tiaræforme, bicoloratum, ad basin nectariis melliferis
instructum.

Habitat ad Caput Bonæ Spei.

Floret a mense Maio in Augustum.


REFERENTIA.

1. Folium.

2. Calyx lente auctus.

3. Stamen auctum.

4. Germen et Pistillum, stigmate lente aucto.

5. Germen lente auctum.


SPECIFIC CHARACTER.

HEATH, with crested tips, within the blossom: flowers cylindrical,
terminal, and two-coloured: leaves by threes, obtuse: branches
straddling: stem low.


DESCRIPTION.

A DWARF shrub, the large and small branches numerous, straddling, and
mostly covered with leaves.

LEAVES by threes, linear, obtuse, straight, smooth, flat on the upper
surface, furrowed beneath, and rounded at the edges.

FLOWERS grow mostly by threes, spreading, or nodding; footstalks short,
coloured, and furnished with three coloured floral leaves; blossoms
cylindrical, flesh-coloured; segments of the border of a pale green, and
upright: the leaflets of the cup are ovate, coloured, and pressed to the
blossom.

SEED-BUD turban-shaped, two-coloured, and furnished at the base with
honey-bearing nectaries.

Native of the Cape of Good Hope.

Flowers from the month of May till August.


REFERENCE.

1. A leaf.

2. The Empalement magnified.

3. A Chive magnified.

4. Seed-bud and Pointal, summit magnified.

5. Seed-bud magnified.


THE Erica pumila is a new species, and very distinct from any with which
we are at present acquainted. Our figure represents the entire plant,
just as we received it growing in a pot. It was first raised at the
Hibbertian collection in 1805, by Mr. Knight, with whom it has flowered
this summer, for the first time in England. From the very small size,
and slow growth of all the plants of this species as yet in cultivation
with us, we are inclined to think it will not at any future period
assume a gigantic appearance; but will most likely, continue to retain a
claim to the specific appellation of pumila.

[Illustration]




ERICA pygmæa.


CHARACTER SPECIFICUS.

ERICA, antheris aristatis, inclusis: flores ramos terminant in umbellis:
foliis ternatis: ramis virgatis.


DESCRIPTIO.

CAULIS humilis: rami et ramuli numerosi, filiformes: rami longi,
patentes, decumbentes.

FOLIA ternata, glabra, curvata, patentia, acuminata.

FLORES ramos terminant in umbellis: in ramulis plerumque ternis:
pedunculis longis, coloratis, pilosis: corolla campanulata, pilosa,
saturate purpurea.

GERMEN tiaræforme, sulcatum, ad basin nectariis melliferis instructum.

Habitat ad Caput Bonæ Spei.

Floret a mense Julii ad Octobrem.


REFERENTIA.

1. Calyx.

2. Corolla expansa.

3. Antheræ et Pistillum, anthera una lente aucta.

4. Germen et Pistillum, stigmate lente aucto.


SPECIFIC CHARACTER.

HEATH, with bearded tips, within the blossom: flowers terminate the
branches in umbels: leaves by threes: branches twiggy.


DESCRIPTION.

STEM low: the large and small branches numerous and thread-shaped: the
larger branches are long, spreading, and decumbent.

LEAVES by threes, smooth, curved, spreading, and sharp-pointed.

FLOWERS terminate the branches in umbels: in the smaller branches mostly
by threes: footstalks long, coloured, and hairy: blossoms bell-shaped,
hairy, and of a deep purple colour.

SEED-BUD turban-shaped, furrowed, and furnished at the base with
honey-bearing nectaries.

Native of the Cape of Good Hope.

Flowers from the month of July till October.


REFERENCE.

1. The Empalement.

2. The Blossom spread open.

3. The Chives and Pointal, one tip magnified.

4. Seed-bud and Pointal, summit magnified.


OUR figure represents an entire plant from the nursery of Mr. Lee, the
only collection in which we have as yet seen this very distinct species
of Erica. It is a dwarf shrub (more curious than beautiful), raised from
Cape seed about the year 1810, and called E. _sanguinolenta_; which we
have no doubt will be readily superseded by the more appropriate title
of _pygmæa_, by which it may be easily recognised either in or out of
bloom.

[Illustration]




ERICA quadrangularis.


CHARACTER SPECIFICUS.

ERICA, antheris muticis, inclusis: floribus terminalibus: corollis
quadrangularibus: caule erecto.


DESCRIPTIO.

CAULIS sesquipedalis, fruticosus, erectus, ramosus: ramis et ramulis
longis.

FOLIA numerosa, sparsa, ensiformia, curvata, adscendentia et patentia,
supra plana, subtus sulcata.

FLORES ramulos terminant, terni, quaterni vel quini, erecti vel
patentes: corolla bicolorata, supra alba, infra incarnata, tubulosa,
quadrata, quatuor valvis vel suturis: oris laciniis revolutis.

Habitat ad Caput Bonæ Spei.

Floret a mense Aprili in Junium.


REFERENTIA.

1. Calyx.

2. Corolla expansa.

3. Anthera una.

4. Germen et Pistillum, stigmate lente aucto.


SPECIFIC CHARACTER.

HEATH, with beardless tips within the blossom: flowers terminal:
blossoms quadrangular: stem erect.


DESCRIPTION.

STEM a foot and a half high, shrubby, upright, and branching: the large
and small branches long.

LEAVES numerous, scattered, sword-shaped, curved, ascending and
spreading, flat on their upper surface, and furrowed beneath.

FLOWERS terminate the smaller branches in threes, fours, or fives, erect
or spreading: blossom two-coloured, white above and flesh-coloured
beneath, tubular, squared, with four valves or seams: segments of the
border rolled back.

Native of the Cape of Good Hope.

Flowers from the month of April till June.


REFERENCE.

1. The Empalement.

2. A Blossom spread out.

3. A Chive.

4. Seed-bud and Pointal, summit magnified.


This new species of Erica is at present but little known: the only
collections in which we have seen it are Mr. Rollinson’s at Tooting, and
Mr. Lee’s Nursery, where our drawing was taken in 1819. It was first
raised from Cape seed in 1812, but is still a scarce plant, and not
easily increased by cuttings. It is very handsome when in flower: its
blossoms resemble wax, with four seams or valves, very unlike any other
species we are at present acquainted with.

[Illustration]




ERICA radiata discolor.


CHARACTER SPECIFICUS.

ERICA antheris muticis, inclusis: floribus verticillatis: caule
fruticoso, erecto.


DESCRIPTIO.

CAULIS bipedalis, erectus, ramosus: ramis subsimplicibus.

FOLIA plerumque quaterna, linearia, patentia, undulata, acuminata.

FLORES in ramulorum sub apicibus verticillati, horizontaliter siti:
corolla subcylindracea: oris laciniis recurvatis, cordatis, albis.

GERMEN tiaræforme, sulcatum, villosum, ad basin nectariis melliferis
instructum.

Habitat ad Caput Bonæ Spei.

Floret per menses autumnales.


REFERENTIA.

1. Varietas Ericæ metulæflora discolor.

2. Calyx.

3. Stamen et Pistillum, anthera una lente aucta.

4. Germen et Pistillum, stigmate lente aucto.


SPECIFIC CHARACTER.

HEATH with beardless tips within the blossom: flowers grow in whorls:
stem shrubby and upright.


DESCRIPTION.

STEM two feet high, upright and branching: the branches nearly simple.

LEAVES mostly by fours, linear, spreading, undulate, and pointed.

FLOWERS grow in whorls near the ends of the branches, standing
horizontally; blossom nearly cylinder-shaped: segments of the border
recurved, heart-shaped, and white.

SEED-BUD turban-shaped, furrowed, villose, and furnished at the base
with honey-bearing nectaries.

Native of the Cape of Good Hope.

Flowers during the autumnal months.


REFERENCE.

1. Discoloured variety of Erica Metulæflora.

2. Calyx.

3. Stamen and Pointal, one tip magnified.

4. Seed-bud and Pointal, summit magnified.


THE Ericas _radiata_ and _metulæflora_, figured in the 1st and 3rd
volume of this work, are scions from a hybrid production of an Erica
known by the specific title of _spuria_. Our figure represents an
elegant variety of the E. radiata, raised from Cape seed at the Nursery
of Messrs. Rollinson in the autumn of 1826.

Among the dissections we have taken the opportunity of giving a branch
with flowers of a similar variation of E. metulæflora, to avoid the
necessity for a separate figure.

[Illustration]




ERICA recurvata.


CHARACTER SPECIFICUS.

ERICA antheris muticis, inclusis, stylo exserto: foliis confertis;
floribus terminalibus, umbellatis, declinatis; caule fruticoso.


DESCRIPTIO.

CAULIS fruticosus, pedalis et ultra: ramulis aggregatis, apice
recurvatis.

FOLIA plerumque sena, sparsa, linearia, obtusa, flexuosa; petiolis
longis.

FLORES in umbellis terminalibus sex ad novem, declinati.

COROLLA oblonga, albicans; oris laciniis rectis; sub-nigris: stylo
rubro, exsertissimo.

GERMEN tiaræforme, sulcatum, ad basin nectariis melliferis instructum:
stylo filiformi, longissimo.

Habitat ad Caput Bonæ Spei.

Floret a Mense Aprili in Julium.


REFERENTIA.

1. Calyx.

2. Corolla.

3. Stamina a Pistilla diducta, anthera una lente aucta.

4. Germen et Pistillum, stigmate lente aucto.


SPECIFIC CHARACTER.

HEATH with beardless tips, within the blossom: shaft without: leaves
crowded together: flowers terminate the branches in umbels, hanging
down: stem shrubby.


DESCRIPTION.

STEM shrubby, a foot or more high; the small branches crowded together,
and recurved at the point.

LEAVES mostly by sixes, scattered, linear, blunt, and flexuose:
footstalks long.

FLOWERS grow in terminal umbels from six to nine, hanging down.

BLOSSOM oblong, of a whitish colour: segments of the border straight, of
a dark-brown colour: shaft red, and very much outside the blossom.

SEED-BUD turban-shaped, furrowed, and furnished at the base with
honey-bearing nectaries: shaft thread-shaped, and very long.

Native of the Cape of Good Hope.

Flowers from the month of April till July.


REFERENCE.

1. The Empalement.

2. The Blossom.

3. The Chives and Pointal, one tip magnified.

4. Seed-bud and Pointal, summit magnified.


THROUGHOUT this extensive family there is not one that bears any
resemblance to this perfectly new and distinct species; the aggregation
of the leaves and branches, joined to the drooping character of its
flowers, with long descending pointals that rival the finest purple
silk, give it a singularity of appearance that renders it equally
interesting with the most splendid species. We have seen it flowering
successively from the end of almost every branch. Our figure represents
nearly an entire plant, from the nursery of Mr. Lee.

[Illustration]




ERICA reflexa.


CHARACTER SPECIFICUS.

ERICA antheris cristatis, inclusis: floribus ramulos terminantibus;
corolla urceolata: foliis ternis: caule fruticoso: ramulis numerosis.


DESCRIPTIO.

CAULIS pedalis et ultra, fruticosus, erecto-divaricatus: ramulis
numerosis.

FOLIA terna, linearia, obtusa, supra plana, subtus sulcata.

FLORES ramulos terminant in umbellis, plerumque quaterni, cernui:
corolla urceolata, carnea, nitida.

Habitat ad Caput Bonæ Spei.

Floret a mense Julii ad Octobrem.


REFERENTIA.

1. Folium.

2. Idem inferum.

3. Stamina a Pistillo diducta, anthera una lente aucta.

4. Germen et Pistillum, stigmate lente aucto.

5. Germen lente auctum.

6. Flores Varietatum duarum.


SPECIFIC CHARACTER.

HEATH, with crested tips within the blossom; flowers terminate the small
branches; blossom pitcher-shaped: leaves by threes: stem shrubby: small
branches numerous.


DESCRIPTION.

STEM a foot or more high, shrubby, upright or straggling: smaller
branches numerous.

LEAVES by threes, linear, obtuse, flat on their upper surface, and
furrowed beneath.

FLOWERS terminate the smaller branches in umbels mostly by fours,
nodding: blossom pitcher-shaped, flesh-coloured, and shining.

Native of the Cape of Good Hope.

Flowers from the month of July till October.


REFERENCE.

1. A Leaf.

2. The same shown from the under side.

3. The Stamens detached from the Pointal, one tip magnified.

4 Seed-bud and Pointal, summit magnified.

5. Seed-bud magnified.

6. Flowers of two Varieties.


OF this species of Erica there are three; one with white, another with
delicate red flowers, and a third or intermediate variation with
blossoms extremely pale.

Our figure represents the full blush variety, not only as best
calculated to represent advantageously on paper, but as further removed
in its appearance from the E. nitida figured in Vol. III., at present so
very scarce, that the white-flowered reflexa is frequently sold for it,
although the flowers in the one resemble a porringer, and the others are
exactly pitcher-shaped.

Our drawing was made from plants in the summer of 1822 at the
Hammersmith Nursery, where we have noticed them for the last ten years
as most luxuriant ornamental greenhouse shrubs.

[Illustration]




ERICA refulgens.


CHARACTER SPECIFICUS.

ERICA, antheris muticis, inclusis; stylo exerto: foliis quaternis:
floribus terminalibus: caule fruticoso.


DESCRIPTIO.

CAULIS fruticosus, sesquipedalis, erectus, ramulis numerosis.

FOLIA quaterna, linearia, longa, patenti-adscendentia.

FLORES in ramulis terminales, plerumque quaterni, cernui: corolla
cylindracea, lucida, ima parte læte rubra, apice viridi.

GERMEN tiaræforme, sulcatum, superne villosum, ad basin nectariis
melliferis instructum.

Habitat ad Caput Bonæ Spei.

Floret a mense Julii ad Octobrem.


REFERENTIA.

1. Calyx.

2. Stamina a Pistillo diducta, anthera unica lente aucta.

3. Germen et Pistillum, stigmate lente aucto.

4. Germen lente auctum.

5. Varietates floribus minoribus.


SPECIFIC CHARACTER.

HEATH, with beardless tips, within the blossom: shaft without: leaves by
fours: flowers terminal: stem shrubby.


DESCRIPTION.

STEM shrubby, a foot and half high, and upright, with numerous small
branches.

LEAVES by fours, linear, long, and between erect and spreading.

FLOWERS terminate the small branches, mostly by fours, nodding: blossom
cylindrical and shining, the lower part of a bright red colour, the
mouth green.

SEED-BUD turban-shaped and furrowed, hairy on the upper part, and
furnished at the base with honey-bearing nectaries.

Native of the Cape of Good Hope.

Flowers from the month of July till October.


REFERENCE.

1. The Empalement.

2. The Chives and Pointal, one tip magnified.

3. Seed-bud and Pointal, summit magnified.

4. Seed-bud magnified.

5. Smaller-flowered varieties.


OUR figure was taken in 1819 from plants in the Hammersmith collection,
and considered as a seminal variety of the E. _versicolor_, though it
certainly more resembles the E. _hirta_: but from these and every other
species of Erica it may be always distinguished just previously to
flowering, by the empalements forming a terminal cone at the end of each
flower-branch of a rich deep red colour, which only separate to allow
the bright green ends of the buds to make their first approach towards
maturity: it is therefore beautiful in every stage of inflorescence.

[Illustration]




ERICA regerminans.


CHARACTER SPECIFICUS.

ERICA, antheris aristatis, inclusis: floribus in umbellis terminalibus,
confertis, sæpe germinantibus; corolla campanulata, odorata: ramis
numerosis.


DESCRIPTIO.

CAULIS pedalis, fruticosus: rami et ramuli numerosi.

FLORES ramos terminant in umbellis confertis, sæpe germinantes: corolla
parva, campanulata, pallidè purpurea, odorata: calycis foliolis parvis,
lanceolatis, adpressis.

GERMEN tiaræforme, sulcatum, ad basin nectariis melliferis instructum.

Habitat ad Caput Bonæ Spei.

Floret a mense Decembris in Junium.


REFERENTIA.

1. Calyx.

2. Corolla.

3. Stamina à Pistillo diducta, antherâ unâ lente auctâ.

4. Germen et Pistillum lente aucta.


SPECIFIC CHARACTER.

HEATH, with bearded tips, within the blossoms: flowers terminate the
branches in umbels, crowded together, often budding: blossom bell-shaped
and sweet-scented: branches numerous.


DESCRIPTION.

STEM a foot high, shrubby: the large and small branches numerous.

FLOWERS terminate the branches in crowded umbels, often budding: blossom
small, bell-shaped, of a pale purple, and sweet-scented: the leaflets of
the cup are lance-shaped, small, and pressed to the blossom.

SEED-BUD turban-shaped, furrowed, and furnished with honey-bearing
nectaries at the base.

Native of the Cape of Good Hope.

Flowers from the month of December till June.


REFERENCE.

1. The Empalement.

2. The Blossom.

3. The Chives detached from the Pointal, summit magnified.

4. Seed-bud and Pointal magnified.


THIS sweet-scented species whilst flowering produces fresh buds in the
centre of the umbels, which, as the surrounding flowers decay, supply
their place, and by that means the plant remains a long time in bloom.
It resembles the E. caffra in many particulars. It is amongst the early
importations from the Cape of Good Hope; and although not equally
estimated with the numerous splendid species of recent introduction, the
abundant succession of the flowers, their agreeable fragrance, and easy
culture, will always render it an object worthy the attention of
cultivators.

[Illustration]




ERICA ruber-calyx.


CHARACTER SPECIFICUS.

ERICA antheris muticis, inclusis: flores ramulos terminant: foliis
quaternis: caule fruticoso.


DESCRIPTIO.

CAULIS pedalis: ramis et ramulis numerosis, flexuosis, filiformibus.

FOLIA quaterna, linearia, recta, obtusa, erecto-patentia.

FLORES ramulos terminant, plerumque quaterni, patentes: calyce et
pedunculis rubris: corolla metulæformi, pellucida, imprimis alba,
denique rosea: oris laciniis erectis.

GERMEN tiaræforme, sulcatum, ad basin nectariis melliferis instructum.

Habitat ad Caput Bonæ Spei.

Floret a mense Januarii ad Maium.


REFERENTIA.

1. Calyx.

2. Antheræ et Pistillum.

3. Stamen unum, anthera lente aucta.

4. Germen et Pistillum, stigmate lente aucto.


SPECIFIC CHARACTER.

HEATH with beardless tips within the blossom: flowers terminate the
smaller branches: leaves by fours: stem shrubby.


DESCRIPTION.

STEM a foot high: the large and smaller branches numerous, flexuose, and
thread-shaped.

LEAVES by fours, linear, straight, obtuse, and between erect and
spreading.

FLOWERS terminate the smaller branches, mostly by fours, spreading:
empalement and footstalks red: blossom skittle-shaped, transparent,
white at first, then dying off a rose colour: segments of the border
upright.

SEED-BUD turban-shaped, furrowed, and furnished at the base with
honey-bearing nectaries.

Native of the Cape of Good Hope.

Flowers from the month of January till May.


REFERENCE.

1. The Empalement.

2. The Chives and Pointal.

3. A Chive, one tip magnified.

4. Seed-bud and Pointal, summit magnified.


This species of Erica in the mutability of its flowers resembles the
blossoms of the _E. colorans_. It was first raised from Cape seed at the
Hammersmith Nursery in the summer of 1825, under the appellation of
_ruber-calyx_: a specific title of one word would have been preferable,
but it is very characteristic of the plant when in bloom, which is a
recommendation not often to be met with where the best specific titles
are already occupied. It is a handsome dwarf shrub, with abundance of
successive bloom.

[Illustration]




ERICA rugosa.


CHARACTER SPECIFICUS.

ERICA, antheris bicornibus, sub-exertis: floriribus sub-terminalibus,
rugosis, rubris: foliis linearibus: ramulis numerosis.


DESCRIPTIO.

CAULIS fruticosus, erectus, bipedalis: ramulis ternis, verticillatis.

FOLIA irregulariter verticillata, 3 vel 5 linearia; parum curvata,
patentia: petiolis longis.

FLORES sub-terminales: corolla sub-tubulosa, patens, rugosa, saturate
rubra; oris laciniis patentibus: pedunculi longi, colorati.

GERMEN tiaræforme, sulcatum, ad basin rubrum, cum nectariis melliferis,
supernè villosum.

Habitat ad Caput Bonæ Spei.

Floret a mense Junii in Augustum.


REFERENTIA.

1. Stamina et Pistillum, stigmate lente aucto.

2. Germen et Pistillum, stigmate lente aucto.

3. Germen lente auctum.


SPECIFIC CHARACTER.

HEATH, with tips two-horned at their base, just without the blossom;
flowers nearly terminal, wrinkly, and red: leaves linear: branches many.


DESCRIPTION.

STEM shrubby, upright, two feet high: branches grow by threes, in
whorls.

LEAVES in irregular whorls, of 3 to 5 linear, slightly curved, and
spreading; footstalks long.

FLOWERS nearly terminal: blossom nearly tubular, spreading, wrinkly, and
of a deep red colour; segments of the border spreading: footstalks long
and coloured.

SEED-BUD turban-shaped, furrowed, red at the base, with honey-bearing
nectaries, villose on the upper part.

Native of the Cape of Good Hope.

Flowers from the month of June till August.


REFERENCE.

1. Chives and Pointal, one tip magnified.

2. Seed-bud and Pointal, summit magnified.

3. Seed-bud magnified.


THIS curious species of Erica was raised from seed at the nursery of Mr.
Rollinson about the year 1806, from which period it has flowered
abundantly; but all attempts to increase it have hitherto proved
abortive; and whether the wrinkly character of its blossoms would be
continued were it to seed with us, is certainly doubtful, as it appears
to be a contraction in the flowers bordering upon monstrosity; and we at
first declined figuring it, expecting the wrinkles would not appear when
next it bloomed; but for four successive summers it has still retained
its strange appearance, more singular than beautiful, but probably more
interesting by its oddity.

[Illustration]




ERICA rupestris _rubra_.


CHARACTER SPECIFICUS.

ERICA antheris cristatis, inclusis: floribus lateralibus, terminalibus,
campanulatis, nutantibus: foliis ternis.


DESCRIPTIO.

CAULIS erectus, sesquipedalis: ramulis plerumque ternis, ad basin
procumbentibus, in medio patentibus, superne adscendentibus.

FOLIA ternata, crassa, obtusa, recta, subtus sulcata, marginibus
rotundatis.

FLORES ad apices ramorum ramulorumque in umbellis irregularibus,
cernuis: corolla campanulata, rubra, oris laciniis patentibus: calyce
lanceolato, adpresso.

GERMEN tiaræforme, bicoloratum, ad basin nectariis melliferis
instructum.

Habitat in Caput Bonæ Spei.

Floret a mense Februarii ad Novembrem.


REFERENTIA.

1. Calyx.

2. Stamina et Pistillum, antherâ unâ lente auctâ.

3. Germen et Pistillum, stigmate lente aucto.

4. Germen lente auctum.


SPECIFIC CHARACTER.

HEATH with crested tips, within the blossom; flowers lateral, terminal,
bell-shaped, and nodding: leaves by threes.


DESCRIPTION.

STEM upright, a foot and a half high: smaller branches mostly by threes,
hanging down at the base of the plant, in the middle spreading out, and
ascending towards the top.

LEAVES by threes, thick, blunt, straight, and furrowed beneath, with
roundish edges.

FLOWERS grow at the ends of the larger and smaller branches, in
irregular umbels, nodding all one way. Blossom bell-shaped and red;
segments of the border spreading. Empalement lance-shaped, and pressed
to the blossom.

SEED-BUD turban-shaped, two-coloured, with honey-bearing nectaries at
the base.

Native of the Cape of Good Hope.

Flowers from the month of February till November.


REFERENCE.

1. The Empalement.

2. The Chives and Pointal, one tip magnified.

3. Seed-bud and Pointal, summit magnified.

4. Seed-bud magnified.


THIS Erica was raised from British seed gathered from the E. rupestris,
in the autumn of 1807, by Mr. Knight, nurseryman, in the King’s Road,
Chelsea, and is the only one, out of a number sown, that vegetated. Its
first year’s growth exhibited a strong resemblance to the habit of the
original species, spreading and hanging over the sides of the pot. The
second year it began to lose its pendulous appearance, and the third
summer it acquired a handsome pyramidal form, instead of the straggling
dwarf character of the mother plant.

It may be found in bloom in spring, summer, autumn, and winter.

[Illustration]




ERICA Russeliana.


CHARACTER SPECIFICUS.

ERICA, antheris muticis, inclusis: floribus terminalibus: pedunculis
longis: foliis quaternis: caulis fruticosus.


DESCRIPTIO.

CAULIS sesquipedalis, virgatus, flexuosus: ramulis erecto-patentibus.

FOLIA quaterna, trigona, leviter curvata, acuta, lucida.

FLORES in apicibus ramorum, plerumque terni, cernui: corolla urceolata,
rubra: laciniis oris patentibus, cordatis, carneis, acutis: pedunculis
rubris, longis, bracteis tribus minoribus: calyx oblongus, acutus.

GERMEN tiaræforme, sulcatum, ad basin nectariis melliferis instructum.

Habitat ad Caput Bonæ Spei.

Floret per menses æstivales, iterumque in mensibus autumnalibus.


REFERENTIA.

1. Folium lente auctum.

2. Calyx.

3. Stamina a Pistillo diducta, anthera una lente aucta.

4. Germen et Pistillum, stigmate lente aucto.

5. Germen lente auctum.


SPECIFIC CHARACTER.

HEATH, with beardless tips, within the blossom: flowers terminal:
peduncles long: leaves by fours: stem shrubby.


DESCRIPTION.

STEM a foot and a half high, twiggy and flexuose: branches between erect
and spreading.

LEAVES by fours, three-sided, slightly curved, pointed and shining.

FLOWERS terminate the ends of the branches, mostly by threes, nodding:
blossom pitcher-shaped, red: segments of the border spreading,
heart-shaped, flesh-coloured, and pointed: footstalks red, long, and
furnished with three small floral leaves: empalement oblong, and
pointed.

SEED-BUD turban-shaped, furrowed, and furnished at the base with
honey-bearing nectaries.

Native of the Cape of Good Hope.

Flowers in the summer months, and again in autumn.


REFERENCE.

1. A Leaf, magnified.

2. The Empalement.

3. The Chives and Pointal, one tip magnified.

4. Seed-bud and Pointal, summit magnified.

5. Seed-bud magnified.


THIS fine new species of Erica was first raised from Cape seed in the
nursery of Mr. Lee at Hammersmith, in the summer of 1824, and named in
compliment to His Grace the Duke of Bedford. It bears very little if any
resemblance to any other species as yet in cultivation with us; it
flowers early in summer, and again in autumn.

[Illustration]




ERICA Sainsburyana.


CHARACTER SPECIFICUS.

ERICA, antheris inclusis, aristatis: floribus umbellatis, terminalibus,
in pedunculis longissimis: foliis ternis, linearibus, longis.


DESCRIPTIO.

CAULIS fruticosus, sesquipedalis: ramis longis, simplicibus,
adscendentibus.

FOLIA terna, linearia, longa, subtus sulcata: petiolis longis,
adpressis.

FLORES ramos terminant in umbellis: corolla metulæformis, saturate
carnea: pedunculi longissimi, filiformes, rubri, bracteis tribus
distantibus lanceolatis instructi: calycis foliolis lanceolatis,
coloratis, adpressis.

GERMEN tiaræforme, longum, sulcatum, ad basin nectariis melliferis
instructum.

Habitat ad Caput Bonæ Spei.

Floret a mense Junii in Septembrem.


REFERENTIA.

1. Calyx.

2. Stamina et Pistillum, antherâ unâ lente auctâ.

3. Germen et Pistillum, stigmate lente aucto.


SPECIFIC CHARACTER.

HEATH, with tips within the blossom, bearded: flowers terminate the
branches in umbels upon very long footstalks: leaves by threes, linear,
and long.


DESCRIPTION.

STEM shrubby, a foot and a half high: with long, simple, ascending
branches.

LEAVES by threes, linear, long, and furrowed beneath: footstalks long,
and pressed to the stem.

FLOWERS terminate the branches in umbels: blossom skittle-shaped and of
a deep flesh colour: footstalks very long, thread-shaped, and red, with
three lance-shaped floral leaves set at a distance on them: leaflets of
the cup lance-shaped, coloured, and pressed to the blossom.

SEED-BUD turban-shaped, long, furrowed, and furnished with honey-bearing
nectaries at the base.

Native of the Cape of Good Hope.

Flowers from the month of June till September.


REFERENCE.

1. The Empalement.

2. The Chives and Pointal, one tip magnified.

3. Seed-bud and Pointal, summit magnified.


THIS fine species of Erica is one of the recent novelties raised from
Cape seed; and being very distinct from any hitherto delineated, we have
named it in honour of Miss Sainsbury, a great admirer of this beautiful
tribe of plants. Our figure was drawn at the nursery of Mr. Rollinson of
Lower Tooting, in September 1810.

[Illustration]




ERICA Salisburia.


CHARACTER SPECIFICUS.

ERICA, antheris muticis, subinclusis: stylo exerto: floribus spicatis,
confertis, prope ramorum apices: corolla clavata: ramis longissimis:
foliis senis vel octonis, erectis.


DESCRIPTIO.

CAULIS erectis, tetrapedalis: ramis plerumque simplicibus.

FOLIA verticillata, sena vel octona, erecta, lanceolata, intus plana,
exterius sulcata: foliis ad basin angustioribus, acuminatis, patentibus.

FLORES spicati, conferti, prope apices ramorum: corollis clavatis,
coccineis, erecto-patentibus: pedunculis coloratis, bracteis tribus
instructis.

Habitat ad Caput Bonæ Spei.

Floret a mense Octobris ad Februarium.


REFERENTIA.

1. Folium ad basin plantæ.

2. Calyx.

3. Corolla.

4. Antheræ et Pistillum, stigmate lente aucto.

5. Germen et Pistillum, stigmate lente aucto.

6. Germen lente auctum.


SPECIFIC CHARACTER.

HEATH, with beardless tips, just within the blossom: shaft without:
flowers growing in a spike, crowded together near the end of the branch:
blossoms club-shaped: branches very long: leaves by six or eight,
upright.


DESCRIPTION.

STEM upright, four feet high: branches mostly simple.

LEAVES grow in whorls of six to eight, upright, and lance-shaped, flat
on the inner and furrowed on the outer side: leaves at the base of the
plant are narrower, pointed, and spreading.

FLOWERS grow in crowded spikes near the end of the branches: blossoms
club-shaped, and of a scarlet colour, between erect and spreading:
footstalks coloured, and furnished with three floral leaves.

Native of the Cape of Good Hope.

Flowers from the month of October till February.


REFERENCE.

1. A Leaf from the base of the plant.

2. The Empalement.

3. A Blossom.

4. The Chives and Pointal, one tip magnified.

5. Seed-bud and Pointal, summit magnified.

6. Seed-bud magnified.


THIS new species of Erica was first raised at the Hammersmith nursery
about the year 1815, and is named after R. Salisbury, Esq., a most able
botanist, and Vice-president of the Linnæan Society. Our drawing was
made from a plant four feet high, with only one flower-stem, and without
any collateral branches.

[Illustration]




ERICA serpyllifolia.


CHARACTER SPECIFICUS.

ERICA antheris muticis inclusis: stylo exerto: stigmate magno: foliis
ternatis: caule debili, fruticoso.


DESCRIPTIO.

CAULIS subpedalis, tenuis: ramis et ramulis filiformibus, numerosis,
flexuosis.

FOLIA terna, cordata, patentia, supra subplana, setis minutis instructa,
subtus glauca, marginibus revolutis.

FLORES terni vel seni, in ramos terminant: corolla parva, campanulata,
pallide carnea; stigmate magno, patente, tetragono, peltato, incluso.

GERMEN tiaræforme, sulcatum, villosum, ad basin nectariis melliferis
instructum.

Habitat ad Caput Bonæ Spei.

Floret a mense Julii ad Novembrem.


REFERENTIA.

1. Folium.

2. Idem auctum.

3. Corolla.

4. Eadem aucta.

5. Stamen et Pistillum.

6. Eadem lente aucta.

7. Germen auctum.


SPECIFIC CHARACTER.

HEATH with beardless tips within the blossom: shaft without: summit
large: leaves ternate: stem weak and shrubby.


DESCRIPTION.

STEM near a foot high and slender: the large and smaller branches are
thread-shaped, numerous, and flexuose.

LEAVES by threes, heart-shaped, and spreading, nearly flat on their
upper surface, and furnished with minute setæ or bristles; glaucous
beneath, with the edges rolled back.

FLOWERS grow by threes or sixes, terminating the branches; blossom
small, bell-shaped, and of a pale flesh-colour; stigma large, spreading,
with four corners, inclosed in a shield.

SEED-BUD turban-shaped, furrowed, villose, and furnished at the base
with honey-bearing nectaries.

Native of the Cape of Good Hope.

Flowers from July till November.


REFERENCE.

1. A leaf.

2. The same magnified.

3. A blossom.

4. The same magnified.

5. Chive and Pointal.

6. The same magnified.

7. Seed-bud magnified.


THE Erica serpyllifolia resembles two very opposed and distinct species
of Heaths, the E. thymifolia and E. peltata. The former similarly
nomenclated; resembling the latter in shape, colour, abundance of
flowers, and enlarged stigma, the expansion of which is so rare and
peculiar to the E. peltata; and is also a most prominent feature in the
physiology of the present figure, but when out of bloom; and the Ericas
_thymifolia_ and _maryfolia_ are the only species that can claim the
least affinity.

It was first raised from Cape seed at the nursery of Messrs. Loddiges,
Hackney. Our drawing is from a plant at Mr. Lee’s, in the summer of
1826.

[Illustration]




ERICA Shannonea.


CHARACTER SPECIFICUS.

ERICA antheris basi bicornibus, inclusis: stylo sub-exserto: floribus
terminalibus, ampullaceis: pedunculis longissimis: foliis ternis.


DESCRIPTIO.

CAULIS pedalis, erectus: rami longi, sub-simplices.

FOLIA terna, trigona, subulata, recta, acuta, supra plana, subtus
carinata.

FLORES terminales in umbellis quinis vel octonis, cum pedunculis
longissimis rubris: corollis pallide carneis, glutinosissimis, magnis,
ad sum mitatem cylindraceis, ad basin inflatis: ore arctato, laciniis
expansis, ovatis.

GERMEN tiaræforme, sulcatum, ad basin nectariis melliferis instructum.

Habitat in Caput Bonæ Spei.

Floret a mense Julii in Septembrem.


REFERENTIA.

1. Calyx.

2. Stamina et Pistillum, antherâ unâ lente auctâ.

3. Germen et Pistillum, stigmate lente aucto.


SPECIFIC CHARACTER.

HEATH with tips two-horned at the base, within the blossom: shaft just
without: flowers terminal, flask-shaped: footstalks very long: leaves by
threes.


DESCRIPTION.

STEM a foot high, upright: branches long, and nearly simple.

LEAVES by threes, three-sided, awl-shaped, straight and pointed, flat on
the upper surface, and keeled beneath.

FLOWERS terminate the branches in umbels of 5 to 8, with very long red
footstalks: blossoms of a pale flesh-colour, very glutinous, and large,
cylindrical on the upper part, and swelled out at the base: narrowed at
the mouth, with the segments spreading and egg-shaped.

SEED-BUD turban-shaped and furrowed, with honey-bearing nectaries at the
base.

Native of the Cape of Good Hope.

Flowers from July till September.


REFERENCE.

1. The Empalement.

2. Chives and Pointal, one tip magnified.

3. Seed-bud and Pointal, summit magnified.


THIS Erica was raised from Cape seed brought over by Niven in 1808. It
is a fine addition to this extensive family, and may be increased by
cuttings, but not so freely as many other species; which joined to the
short period of only three years since it was first raised from seed,
makes it at present rather scarce, and in but few collections. Our
figure represents a plant in the nursery of Mr. Rollinson, where we
found it under the specific title of Shannonea, in compliment to the
Earl of Shannon.

[Illustration]




ERICA Solandroides.


CHARACTER SPECIFICUS.

ERICA, antheris aristatis, sub-exertis: floribus capitatis, aggregatis,
cernuis: foliis confertis, pilosis, obtusis: ramis longis, simplicibus:
caule erecto.


DESCRIPTIO.

CAULIS pedalis et ultra: ramis simplicibus, longis, erectis, vel
flexuosis.

FOLIA irregularia, plerumque quatuor, aggregata, pilosa, linearia
obtusa, adscendentia: foliis ad basin patentibus.

FLORES capitatim terminales, aggregati: corolla parva, albente,
tubo-campanulata: calyce duplici, exteriore trifoliato, subulato,
piloso, adpresso: pedunculo brevi.

Habitat ad Caput Bonæ Spei.

Floret a mense Maio in Julium.


REFERENTIA.

1. Calyx lente auctus.

2. Flos.

3. Stamen unum lente aucto.

4. Germen et Pistillum, stigmate lente aucto.

5. Germen lente auctum.


SPECIFIC CHARACTER.

HEATH, with bearded tips, just without the blossom: flowers grow in
crowded heads, nodding: leaves crowded, hairy, and obtuse: branches long
and simple: stem upright.


DESCRIPTION.

STEM a foot or more high: branches simple, long, upright, or flexuose.

LEAVES irregular, mostly by fours, crowded together, hairy, linear
obtuse, and ascending: leaves at the base of the plant spreading.

FLOWERS terminate the branches in crowded heads: blossom small, whitish,
tubularly bell-shaped: cup double, the outer one three-leaved
awl-shaped, hairy, and pressed to the blossom: footstalk short.

Native of the Cape of Good Hope.

Flowers from the month of May till July.


REFERENCE.

1. The Empalement.

2. A Flower.

3. A Chive magnified.

4. Seed-bud and Pointal, summit magnified.

5. Seed-bud magnified.


THIS Erica has been so often baptized, that we are under the necessity
of detailing the order of their succession. First it was called E.
Solandra after the late Dr. Solander; secondly, another plant of a
similar appearance, but bearing purple flowers, was named after that
gentleman. This plant was then for some years called the old Solandra;
but has recently been named Erica stellata, which we cannot retain,
having already occupied that specific title. No other way remained to
avoid confusion, but again to rename it something like the first, and
not unlike the second, by which means we hope to keep it in its proper
sphere--at least to make it recognised for what it has been, by what it
now is called.

Our drawing was made from plants at the Hammersmith Nursery.

[Illustration]




ERICA splendens.


CHARACTER SPECIFICUS.

ERICA, antheris aristatis, inclusis: stylo sub-exerto: floribus
cylindraceis, tomentosis: foliis quaternis.


DESCRIPTIO.

CAULIS fruticosus, erectus, pedalis et ultra: rami numerosi, tomentosi.

FOLIA quaterna, linearia, obtusa, tomentosa, adscendentia.

FLORES plerumque quaterni, patentes, terminales: corollis uncialibus,
ovato-cylindraceis, villosis, coccineis: oris laciniis erecto-patulis.

GERMEN tiaræforme, villosum, ad basin nectariis melliferis instructum.

Habitat ad Caput Bonæ Spei.

Floret a mense Maii ad Augustum.


REFERENTIA.

1. Calyx.

2. Anthera una lente aucta.

3. Germen et Pistillum, stigmate lente aucto.

4. Germen lente auctum.


SPECIFIC CHARACTER.

HEATH, with bearded tips, within the blossom: shaft just without:
flowers cylindrical and downy: leaves by fours.


DESCRIPTION.

STEM shrubby, upright, a foot or more high: branches numerous and downy.

LEAVES by fours, linear, blunt, downy, and ascending.

FLOWERS grow mostly by fours, spreading, and terminal: blossoms an inch
long, ovately cylindrical, villose, of a scarlet colour: segments of the
border upright and spreading.

SEED-BUD turban-shaped, hairy, and furnished at the base with
honey-bearing nectaries.

Native of the Cape of Good Hope.

Flowers from May till August.


REFERENCE.

1. The Empalement.

2. A Chive magnified.

3. Seed-bud and Pointal, summit magnified.

4. Seed-bud magnified.


WE have adopted the specific title by which this Erica is well known in
the gardens, although we should have preferred that of _tomentosa_, so
decidedly descriptive of the downy character that pervades the whole
plant, and which renders it difficult to preserve from the damps, which
love to lodge on soft and downy pillows, too often to the destruction of
their resting-place. Our figure represents an entire plant from the
Nursery of Messrs. Colville, in the year 1816.

[Illustration]




ERICA stellifera.


CHARACTER SPECIFICUS.

ERICA, antheris muticis, inclusis: floribus subterminalibus: foliis
quaternis: ramis verticillatis.


DESCRIPTIO.

CAULIS pedalis et ultra: rami et ramuli verticillati.

FOLIA quaterna, lanceolata, pilosa, patentia.

FLORES subterminales, umbellati, erecti: pedunculi purpurei: calycis
foliola lanceolata, basi bracteis binis oppositis instructa.

COROLLA inflata, ovata, apice arctata, incarnata: limbo æquali, patente,
plerumque sexfido, albido.

GERMEN tiaræforme, sulcatum, ad basin nectariis melliferis instructum.

Habitat ad Caput Bonæ Spei.

Floret a mense Martii in Augustum.


REFERENTIA.

1. Folium.

2. Calyx lente auctus.

3. Antheræ et Pistillum, anthera una lente aucta.

4. Germen et Pistillum, stigmate lente aucto.

5. Flos varietatis.


SPECIFIC CHARACTER.

HEATH, with beardless tips, within the blossom: flowers nearly terminal:
leaves by fours: branches whorled.


DESCRIPTION.

STEM a foot or more high: the large and smaller branches grow in whorls.

LEAVES by fours, lance-shaped, hairy and spreading.

FLOWERS nearly terminal, in umbels, upright: footstalks purple: leaflets
of the cup are lance-shaped, and furnished at the base with two opposite
floral leaves.

BLOSSOM of an inflated form, ovate, narrowed towards the end, and
flesh-coloured: segments of the border equal, spreading, mostly
six-cleft and white.

SEED-bud turban-shaped, furrowed, and furnished at the base with
honey-bearing nectaries.

Native of the Cape of Good Hope.

Flowers from March till August.


REFERENCE.

1. A leaf.

2. The Empalement magnified.

3. Chives and Pointal, one tip magnified.

4. Seed-bud and Pointal, summit magnified.

5. Flower of a variety.


This Erica is supposed to have been raised from seed of E. _ventricosa_,
or _pregnans_, and is called the star-flowered variety from the mouth of
the flowers having six divisions, and the specific character of the
genus being only four-cleft. There are one or two flowers that still
remain unaltered, just sufficient to proclaim the metamorphosis not
quite complete. There is also another seminal variety with six-cleft
petals, and we have given a flower of it among the dissections; this
variation, however, can in no other respect be distinguished from the
old ventricose species; but the one our figure represents differs in
many other particulars, that well support its claim to a specific
distinction.

[Illustration]




ERICA suaveolens.


CHARACTER SPECIFICUS.

ERICA antheris muticis inclusis: floribus racemosis: foliis sparsis:
caule fruticoso, erecto.


DESCRIPTIO.

CAULIS sesquipedalis, erectus, ramosus: ramulis simplicibus.

FOLIA quina vel sena, numerosa, sparsa, linearia, acuta, adscendentia.

FLORES in apicibus ramorum, subterminales et racemosi: corolla
cylindrica, odorata, pallide purpurea; oris laciniis recurvata.

GERMEN tiaræforme, sulcatum, ad basin nectariis melliferis instructum.

Habitat ad Caput Bonæ Spei.

Floret a mense Maii in Julium.


REFERENTIA.

1. Calyx.

2. Corolla varietatis profundæ.

3. Stamina et Pistillum, anthera una lente aucta.

4. Germen et Pistillum, stigmate lente aucto.


SPECIFIC CHARACTER.

HEATH with beardless tips within the blossom: flowers grow in clusters:
leaves scattered: stem shrubby and erect.


DESCRIPTION.

STEM a foot and half high, upright, branching: the smaller branches
simple.

LEAVES by fives or sixes, numerous, scattered, linear, pointed, and
ascending.

FLOWERS at the ends of the branches, nearly terminal, and clustered:
blossom cylindrical, sweet-scented, and of a pale purple colour:
segments of the border recurved.

SEED-BUD turban-shaped, and furrowed, furnished at the base with
honey-bearing nectaries.

Native of the Cape of Good Hope.

Flowers from the month of May till July.


REFERENCE.

1. Empalement.

2. Blossom of a darker variety.

3. Chives and Pointal, one tip magnified.

4. Seed-bud and Pointal, summit magnified.


THIS delicate species of Erica was raised from seed in the summer of
1828, at the Nursery of Messrs. Rollinson, Lower Tooting. The only Heath
to which it bears any resemblance is the E. densa, figured in Vol. III.
Its specific title alone will recommend it as a most valuable addition
to this extensive genus, as the odour of its blossoms is equal in
fragrance to almost any Rose.

[Illustration]




ERICA sulphurea.


CHARACTER SPECIFICUS.

ERICA, antheris muticis, sub-inclusis: stylo exerto: floribus
cylindraceis, sessilibus: foliis quaternis.


DESCRIPTIO.

CAULIS pedalis et ultra, erectus: rami sparsi, virgati, frequentes,
villosi.

FOLIA quaterna, tenuia, obtusa, villosa, erecta.

FLORES sub-solitarii, sessiles, ramulos terminantes: corollis
cylindraceo-clavatis, curvatis, villosis: limbo campanulato, revoluto.

GERMEN tiaræforme, sulcatum, ad basin nectariis melliferis instructum.

Habitat ad Caput Bonæ Spei.

Floret a mense Junii ad Octobrem.


REFERENTIA.

1. Folium lente auctum.

2. Calyx lente auctus.

3. Stamina et Pistillum, antherâ unâ lente auctâ.

4. Germen et Pistillum, stigmate lente aucto.


SPECIFIC CHARACTER.

HEATH, with beardless tips, just within the blossom: shaft without:
flowers are cylindrical and sessile: leaves by fours.


DESCRIPTION.

STEM a foot or more high, upright: branches scattered, twiggy, numerous,
and hairy.

LEAVES by fours, thin, blunt, villose, and upright.

FLOWERS grow singly, sessile, and terminate the smaller branches:
blossoms cylindrically club-shaped, curved, and hairy: the segments of
the border are bell-shaped, and rolled back.

SEED-BUD turban-shaped, furrowed, and furnished at the base with
honey-bearing nectaries.

Native of the Cape of Good Hope.

Flowers from June till October.


REFERENCE.

1. A leaf magnified.

2. The Empalement magnified.

3. Chives and Pointal, one tip magnified.

4. Seed-bud and Pointal, summit magnified.


THIS lively shrub was first raised from Cape seed at the Hammersmith
Nursery in 1814. In its general character it very much resembles the E.
_tubiflora_ and the E. _sordida_, distinct from each, and yet resembling
both. It is a brilliant addition to the gay and extensive genus Erica.

[Illustration]




ERICA taxifolia, _major_.


CHARACTER SPECIFICUS.

ERICA, antheris cristatis, inclusis: floribus in umbellis terminalibus:
corollis urceolatis: foliis ternis, trigonis, mucronatis.


DESCRIPTIO.

CAULIS erectus, bipedalis: ramulis ternis, verticillatis.

FOLIA terna, rigida, trigona, mucronata, glauca, suprà plana, subtùs
canaliculata: petiolis longis.

FLORES ramos terminant in umbellis erectis: pedunculi colorati, bracteis
tribus coloratis: corolla urceolata, carnea, calyce colorato fere tecta.

GERMEN tiaræforme, sulcatum, ad basin nectariis melliferis instructum.

Habitat ad Caput Bonæ Spei.

Floret a mense Julii in Decembrem.


REFERENTIA.

1. Calyx.

2. Stamen unum, cum antherâ unâ lente auctâ.

3. Germen auctum.


SPECIFIC CHARACTER.

HEATH, with crested tips, within the blossom; flowers terminate the
branches in umbels: blossoms pitcher-shaped: leaves by threes,
three-sided, and mucronated.


DESCRIPTION.

STEM upright, two feet high; smaller branches grow by threes in whorls.

LEAVES by threes, harsh, three-sided, mucronated, glaucous, flat on the
upper surface, and channelled beneath: footstalks long.

FLOWERS grow at the ends of the branches in upright umbels: footstalks
coloured, with three coloured floral leaves: blossom pitcher-shaped,
flesh-coloured, and almost covered by a coloured cup.

SEED-BUD turban-shaped, furrowed, and furnished with honey-bearing
nectaries at the base.

Native of the Cape of Good Hope.

Flowers from the month of July till December.


REFERENCE.

1. The Empalement.

2. A Chive, with a tip magnified.

3. Seed-bud magnified.


THIS fine plant resembles both the E. calycina major and the E. elegans,
as well as the E. taxifolia, of which it is considered as a large
variety: but from the crested character of the antheræ we are inclined
to regard it as equally related to the two former species. It is well
known to cultivators by the title we have adopted, and is said to have
been first raised from Cape seed at the Hibbertian collection in 1806.
Our drawing was made from a plant two feet high in the nursery of Mr.
Williams.

[Illustration]




ERICA Templea.


CHARACTER SPECIFICUS.

ERICA, muticis inclusis: floribus terminalibus: cernuis, foliis
lanceolatis, hirsutis: caulis fruticosa.


DESCRIPTIO.

CAULIS fruticosus, pedalis, ramis et ramulis, simplicibus, flexuosis.

FOLIA sena, lanceolata, curvata, patentia, supra plana, subtus sulco
exarata: marginibus hirsutis.

FLORES in ultimis ramis terminales, in umbellis, cernuis; corolla sub
cylindracea, ad basin inflata, subalbia, supra læte rubra et striatis,
ore arcuata pilosa, laciniis revolutis.

GERMEN tiaræforme, sulcatum, pilosum, ad basin nectariis melliferis
instructum.

Habitat ad Caput Bonæ Spei.

Floret a mense Septembri in Decembrem.


REFERENTIA.

1. Folium.

2. Idem infra lente aucta.

3. Stamen et pistillum, antherà unà lente auctâ.

4. Germen et pistillum stigmata lente aucta.


SPECIFIC CHARACTER.

HEATH, with beardless tips, within the blossom: flowers terminal and
nodding: leaves lance-shaped and hirsute: stem shrubby.


DESCRIPTION.

STEM shrubby, a foot high; the large and smaller branches simple and
flexuose.

LEAVES by sixes, lance shaped, curved and spreading, flat on their upper
surface and deeply furrowed beneath: margins harshly haired.

FLOWERS terminate the ends of the branches in umbels, nodding: blossom
nearly cylindrical, swelled at the base, whitish, of a bright red colour
above, and striped: narrowed at the mouth, and hairy segments rolled
back.

SEED-BUD turban-shaped, furrowed, hairy, and furnished at the base with
honey-bearing nectaries.

Native of the Cape of Good Hope.

Flowers from the month of September till December.


REFERENCE.

1. A Leaf.

2. The same shewn from beneath, magnified.

3. Chives and pointal, one tip magnified.

4. Seed-bud and pointal, summit magnified.


THIS Erica was first raised from seed at the Hammersmith Nursery, about
the year 1820, and named by the late Mr. Lee after Lady Temple; it is a
perfectly new and distinct species; the Erica’s cerinthoides and obbata
are the only heaths to which it bears any resemblance. It is a handsome
shrub low in stature, but easily distinguished from most of this fine
tribe by its glaucous, hairy foliage.

[Illustration]




ERICA tenuiflora carnea.


CHARACTER SPECIFICUS.

ERICA antheris muticis, inclusis: flores ramos terminant: foliis
quaternis: caule fruticoso.


DESCRIPTIO.

CAULIS pedalis et ultra, fruticosus, flexuosus, filiformis, virgatus.

FOLIA quaterna, leviter tomentosa, linearia, brevia, acuta, supra plana,
subtus sulcata.

FLORES ramos terminant, terni vel quaterni, plerumque adscendentes:
corolla tubæformi, tenuissima, incarnata: laciniis oris æqualibus,
cordatis, acutis, patentibus.

GERMEN tiaræforme, sulcatum, ad basin nectariis melliferis instructum.

Habitat ad Caput Bonæ Spei.

Floret per menses æstivales.


REFERENTIA.

1. Calyx.

2. Antheræ et Pistillum.

3. Stamen unum, anthera lente aucta.

4. Germen et Pistillum, stigmate lente aucto.


SPECIFIC CHARACTER.

HEATH with beardless tips within the blossom: flowers terminate the
branches: leaves by fours: stem shrubby.


DESCRIPTION.

STEM a foot or more high, flexuose, thread-shaped, and twiggy.

LEAVES by fours, slightly downy, linear, short, pointed, flat on their
upper surface, and furrowed beneath.

FLOWERS terminate the branches by threes and fours, mostly ascending:
blossom trumpet-shaped, very slender, and flesh-coloured: segments of
the border equal, heart-shaped, pointed, and spreading.

SEED-BUD turban-shaped, furrowed, and furnished at the base with
honey-bearing nectaries.

Native of the Cape of Good Hope.

Flowers during the summer months.


REFERENCE.

1. The Empalement.

2. The Chives and Pointal.

3. A Chive, one tip magnified.

4. Seed-bud and Pointal, summit magnified.


Our figure represents a fine new species of Erica communicated from the
extensive collection of His Grace the Duke of Bedford at Woburn Abbey,
where it was raised from seed in the summer of 1824. In its foliage it
very much resembles the _E. tenuiflora alba_, figured in our third
volume; the principal if not the only distinction is, when in bloom, the
delicacy of its flowers, whose fine blush-colour gives it a decided
preference over the white variety. It is considered as a variety through
the medium of the _E. spuria_, a mule to which the genus is indebted for
many fine variations.

[Illustration]




ERICA Thunbergia.


CHARACTER SPECIFICUS.

ERICA, antheris muticis, inclusis: stylo sub-exerto: floribus globosis,
campanulatis: foliis ternis.


DESCRIPTIO.

CAULIS sesquipedalis, erectus: ramis filiformibus, virgatis.

FOLIA ternata, linearia, erecta, obtusa.

FLORES prope apices ramulorum umbellati: pedunculis longissimis: corolla
tubo globoso luteo: limbo campanulato: laciniis cordatis, magnis, læte
coccineis.

GERMEN tiaræforme, sulcatum, ad basin nectariis melliferis instructum.

Habitat ad Caput Bonæ Spei.

Floret a mense Februarii ad Julium.


REFERENTIA.

1. Calyx.

2. Corolla.

3. Stamina et Pistillum.

4. Germen et Pistillum.

5. Anthera una lente aucta.

6. Flos plenus vel monstrosus.

7. Idem expansus.


SPECIFIC CHARACTER.

HEATH, with beardless tips, within the blossom: shaft just without:
flowers globular, and bell-shaped: leaves by threes.


DESCRIPTION.

STEM a foot and half high, upright: branches thread-shaped and twiggy.

LEAVES by threes, linear, upright, and blunt-ended.

FLOWERS grow near the ends of the branches, in umbels: footstalks very
long; blossom with a round tube of a yellow colour: mouth of the flower
bell-shaped: segments heart-shaped, large, and of a bright scarlet.

SEED-BUD turban-shaped, and furrowed, with honey-bearing nectaries at
the base.

Native of the Cape of Good Hope.

Flowers from February till July.


REFERENCE.

1. The Empalement.

2. A Blossom.

3. Chives and Pointal.

4. Seed-bud and Pointal.

5. One tip magnified.

6. A double or monstrous Flower.

7. The same spread open.


THIS Erica is said to be first described by Professor Montin in the
Upsal Transactions. It is a very interesting plant, combining beauty
with novelty, and perfectly distinct from any other species at present
known: it bears the name of that able botanist Thunberg, and was first
raised at the Hammersmith Nursery from Cape seed brought by the late F.
Masson, Collector to the Royal Gardens at Kew.

[Illustration]




ERICA transparens.


CHARACTER SPECIFICUS.

ERICA, antheris muticis, inclusis: floribus terminalibus: foliis ternis.


DESCRIPTIO.

CAULIS bipedalis, fruticosus, erectus.

FOLIA ternata, linearia, nitida, erecto-patentia: foliis majoribus
flexuosis.

FLORES plerumque terni, cernui, ad ramorum extremitates: calyx duplex,
crassus, adpressus: calyx exterior trifoliatus: corolla tubulosa,
purpurea: oris laciniis viridi-albicantibus.

Habitat ad Caput Bonæ Spei.

Floret a mense Julii ad Aprilem.


REFERENTIA.

1. Calyx.

2. Antheræ et Pistillum, anthera una lente aucta.

3. Germen et Pistillum, stigmate lente aucto.

4. Germen lente auctum.


SPECIFIC CHARACTER.

HEATH, with beardless tips, within the blossom: flowers terminal: leaves
by threes.


DESCRIPTION.

STEM two feet high, shrubby, and erect.

LEAVES by threes, linear, shining, erect, and spreading: the larger
leaves are flexuose.

FLOWERS grow mostly by threes, drooping, at the ends of the branches:
empalement double, thick, and pressed to the blossom: the exterior calyx
three-leaved: blossom tubular and purple: the segments of the border of
a greenish white.

Native of the Cape of Good Hope.

Flowers from the month of July till April.


REFERENCE.

1. The Empalement.

2. Chives and Pointal, one tip magnified.

3. Seed-bud and Pointal, summit magnified.

4. Seed-bud magnified.


THE Erica _transparens_ may be considered as one of the most beautiful
of this fine tribe of plants. Its flowers equal in lustre the finest
silk: their succession is so abundant, that we have found it in
luxuriant bloom for six months. Our drawing was finished in the month of
February 1820; and although the cold season checked the rich colour of
its blossoms, yet was it (even so restrained) the most elegant ornament
of the conservatory. It resembles the E. _discolor_ in many particulars,
but is specifically distinct in having the anthers _muticæ_ instead of
_aristatæ_.

[Illustration]




ERICA triflora.


CHARACTER SPECIFICUS.

ERICA, antheris cristatis, inclusis: foliis ternis; floribus ternis,
globosis, albis: calyce magno.


DESCRIPTIO.

CAULIS sesquipedalis, erectus, ramosus: ramulis numerosis, plerumque
ternis.

FOLIA terna, sub-trigona, acuta, lucida, patentia; petiolis longis,
adpressis.

FLORES ramulos terminantes, terni, cernui: pedunculis brevibus, bracteis
tribus instructis, calyci adpressis: foliola lato-ovata, carinata, alba,
magna, corollæ albæ, globosæ, adpressa.

GERMEN tiaræforme, sulcatum, ad basin nectariis melliferis instructum.

Habitat ad Caput Bonæ Spei.

Floret a mense Aprili in Julium.


REFERENTIA.

1. Ramus parvæ varietatis.

2. Stamina et Pistillum, antherâ unâ lente auctâ.

3. Germen et Pistillum, stigmate lente aucto.


SPECIFIC CHARACTER.

HEATH, with crested tips within the blossom: leaves by threes: flowers
grow by threes, globular, and white: empalement large.


DESCRIPTION.

STEM a foot and a half high, upright and branching, with numerous small
branches, mostly by threes.

LEAVES by threes, nearly three-sided, pointed, shining, and spreading:
footstalks long, and pressed to the stem.

FLOWERS terminate the smaller branches by threes, nodding: footstalks
short, furnished with three floral leaves, and pressed to the cup:
leaves of the empalement broadly ovate, keeled, white, large, and
pressed to the blossom, which is white and globular.

SEED-BUD turban-shaped, furrowed, and furnished at the base with
honey-bearing nectaries.

Native of the Cape of Good Hope.

Flowers from the month of April till July.


REFERENCE.

1. A Branch of a small variety.

2. Chives and Pointal, one tip magnified.

3. Seed-bud and Pointal, summit magnified.


ALTHOUGH this Erica is well known to cultivators by the specific title
of triflora, it could not be discriminated by that name, as more than
half the genus at present known bear flowers by threes, and which its
nomenclator was not aware of, being amongst the earliest importations
from the Cape. Our figure was drawn from a plant in the collection of
Messrs. Colville, in the summer of 1808.

[Illustration]




ERICA vernix, _longiflora_.


CHARACTER SPECIFICUS.

ERICA, antheris cristatis, inclusis: floribus ternis, tricoloribus,
viscosis, urceolatis: foliis ternis.


DESCRIPTIO.

CAULIS erectus, sesquipedalis; ramulis ternis, verticillatis.

FOLIA ternata, sub-trigona, supra plana, subtus sulco exarata: petiolis
longis.

FLORES plerumque ternati, cernui, speciosi: pedunculi colorati, bracteis
tribus coloratis instructi. Corolla urceolata, glutinosissima, et
lucida, colore saturate aurantio: laciniis oris erectis, saturate
viridibus: calycis foliolis ovato-acutis, adpressis.

GERMEN tiaræforme, sulcatum, ad basin nectariis melliferis instructum.

Habitat ad Caput Bonæ Spei.

Floret a mense Februarii in Junium.


REFERENTIA.

1. Calyx.

2. Stamen auctum.

3. Germen et Pistillum, stigmate lente aucto.


SPECIFIC CHARACTER.

HEATH, with crested tips within the blossom: flowers grow by threes, are
three-coloured, clammy, and pitcher-shaped: leaves by threes.


DESCRIPTION.

STEM shrubby, a foot and a half high: the branches grow by threes in
whorls.

LEAVES by threes, nearly three-sided, flat on their upper surface, and
furrowed beneath: footstalks long.

FLOWERS grow mostly by threes, nodding and showy: footstalks coloured,
furnished with three coloured floral leaves: blossom pitcher-shaped,
very glutinous, and shining, of a deep gold colour: segments of the
border are upright, and of a deep green: the leaflets of the cup are
ovate-pointed, and pressed to the blossom.

SEED-BUD turban-shaped, furrowed, and furnished with honey-bearing
nectaries at the base.

Native of the Cape of Good Hope.

Flowers from the month of February till June.


REFERENCE.

1. The Empalement.

2. A Chive magnified.

3. Seed-bud and Pointal, summit magnified.


THIS elegant addition to the extensive family of the Ericæ was raised
from Cape seed in the Summer of 1808, by Mr. Knight, Nurseryman, of the
King’s Road, Chelsea. The difference between this plant and the E.
vernix is easily discernible when they are in flower; but from the great
similitude in their habit, stalks, and leaves, it is scarcely possible
to distinguish them from each other when out of bloom.

[Illustration]




ERICA vernex rubra.


CHARACTER SPECIFICUS.

ERICA antheris cristatis, inclusis: floribus in medio ramorum: foliis
ternatis: caule erecto.


DESCRIPTIO.

CAULIS pedalis et ultra: ramis plerumque ternis.

FOLIA ternata, subulata, supra plana, subtus sulco exarata.

FLORES ramulos ternatim plerumque terminant in medio ramorum, cernui:
corolla subglobosa, ignea, glutinosissima, et lucida: limbo saturate
viridi: laciniis æqualibus, erectis.

GERMEN tiaræforme, ad basin nectariis melliferis instructum.

Habitat ad Caput Bonæ Spei.

Floret per menses vernales, iterumque mensibus autumnalibus.


REFERENTIA.

1. Calyx.

2. Stamen unum, anthera lente aucta.

3. Germen et Pistillum, stigmate lente aucto.

4. Germen lente auctum.


SPECIFIC CHARACTER.

HEATH with crested tips within the blossom: flowers grow in the middle
of the large branches: leaves by threes: stem upright.


DESCRIPTION.

STEM a foot or more high: branches mostly by threes.

LEAVES by threes, awl-shaped, flat on their upper surface, and furrowed
beneath.

FLOWERS grow in the middle of the large branches, and terminate the
small branches mostly by threes, nodding: blossom nearly globular, of a
fiery colour, very glutinous, and shining: border of a deep green:
segments equal and upright.

SEED-BUD turban-shaped, and furnished at the base with honey-bearing
nectaries.

Native of the Cape of Good Hope.

Flowers in the spring months, and again in autumn.


REFERENCE.

1. The Empalement.

2. A Chive, summit magnified.

3. Seed-bud and Pointal, summit magnified.

4. Seed-bud magnified.


THIS Erica was first raised in the summer of 1823, and flowered in the
spring of 1824, at Messrs. Rollinson’s nursery: it also bloomed again in
the autumn of the same year, and is therefore doubly valuable. It is at
present a scarce plant; and, although only a variation between E. vernex
and E. ardens, is superior to either of them in beauty, and will, no
doubt, be considered as one of the finest of the Ericæ family.

[Illustration]




ERICA viridiflora.


CHARACTER SPECIFICUS.

ERICA antheris minute bicornutis, subexsertis: floribus sessilibus,
nutantibus: foliis ternatis: caule ramoso.


DESCRIPTIO.

CAULIS humilis, erectus, fruticosus: ramulis plerumque ternis.

FOLIA terna, glabra, sub-trigona, curvata, acuta.

FLORES terni in apicibus ramulorum, dependentes: pedunculi nulli:
perianthium duplex, exteriori triphyllo: corolla viridis, viscosa,
metulæ-flora: laciniis limbi erectis.

GERMEN tiaræforme, sulcatum, ad basin nectariis melliferis instructum.

Habitat ad Caput Bonæ Spei.

Floret a mense Junii usque ad Augustum.


REFERENTIA.

1. Calyx.

2. Stamina et pistillum.

3. Stamen unum, anthera lente aucta.

4. Germen et pistillum, stigmate lente aucto.


SPECIFIC CHARACTER.

HEATH with tips minutely two-horned just without the blossom: flowers
sessile, and hanging down: leaves by threes: stem shrubby.


DESCRIPTION.

STEM low, upright, and shrubby: smaller branches mostly by threes.

LEAVES by threes, smooth, nearly three-sided, curved, and pointed.

FLOWERS grow by threes at the ends of the smaller branches, hanging
down: footstalks none: cup double, the outer one three-leaved; blossom
green, clammy, and skittle-shaped: segments of the border upright.

SEED-BUD turban-shaped, furrowed, and furnished at the base with
honey-bearing nectaries.

Native of the Cape of Good Hope.

Flowers from the month of June till August.


REFERENCE.

1. The Empalement.

2. Chives and Pointal.

3. A Chive, summit magnified.

4. Seed-bud and Pointal, summit magnified.


THIS little green-flowered shrub at first sight bears a strong
resemblance to the E. clavata, but on close inspection will be found to
differ in almost every particular, except colour, from that species. We
first observed the E. viridiflora, at the Hammersmith nursery, in 1820,
at which period there was only one plant of it that had been raised from
Cape seed: at present there are many other plants of it, that will, upon
comparison, be found to differ from the E. clavata, not only in the
exterior, but also in the interior of the blossom, as the anthers in
this species are minutely bicornute, and in the other beardless.

[Illustration]




ERICA undulata.


CHARACTER SPECIFICUS.

ERICA muticis inclusis: floribus terminalibus: corollis ampullaceis:
foliis ternis.


DESCRIPTIO.

CAULIS fruticosus, pedalis: fruticosus rami virgati flexuosi.

FOLIA terna, linearia, brevia adscendentia verticillis, irregulariter
confertis.

FLORES ramulos terminant plerumque terni: corolla uncialis ampullacea,
costata, undulata, rubra: oris laciniis recurvatis.

GERMEN tiaræforme, sulcatum, ad basin nectariis melliferis instructum.

Habitat ad Caput Bonæ Spei.

Floret a mense Maii in Julium.


REFERENTIA.

1. Folium.

2. Calyx.

3. Stamen, antherâ lente auctâ.

4. Germen et pistillum, stigmate lente aucto.


SPECIFIC CHARACTER.

HEATH, with beardless tips, within the blossom: flowers terminal:
blossom flask-shaped: leaves by threes.


DESCRIPTION.

STEM shrubby, a foot high: shrubby branches, twiggy and flexuose.

LEAVES by threes, linear, short and ascending, in irregular crowded
whorles.

FLOWERS terminate the branches mostly by threes: blossom an inch long,
flask-shaped, ribbed, waved, and red: segments of the border rolled
back.

SEED-BUD turban-shaped and furrowed, and furnished at the base with
honey-bearing nectaries.

Native of the Cape of Good Hope.

Flowers from the month of May till July.


REFERENCE.

1. A Leaf.

2. The Empalement.

3. A Chive, tip magnified.

4. Seed-bud and pointal, summit magnified.


OUR drawing of this singular species of Erica was made from a plant at
the Nursery of Messrs. Rollinson, in the summer of 1828, said to be
raised from seed of the E. translucens. Its contort flowers suggested a
specific title, by which, in bloom, it could not fail to be recognised;
the undulations continue the same from the early bud state, to the decay
of the full-grown flower. The only Heath we ever met with of a similar
and rather more contort character, was E. rugosa, (figured in Vol. 3,)
which never ripened seed nor would propagate by cuttings, thus
indicating an abortive novelty on which Nature reluctantly conferred the
power of vegetation.

[Illustration]

SYSTEMATICAL ARRANGEMENT

OF THE

LXXII ERICAS, OR HEATHS, CONTAINED IN

VOL. IV.

Taken from the shape of the tips, and the number of leaves which
surround the stem in one whorl.


ANTHERÆ ARISTATÆ.    TIPS BEARDED.

 _Foliis ternis._   _Leaves by threes._

E. Comptoniana     Compton H.
-- grandinosa      Hail-like
-- nivalis         Snowy white
-- pygmæa          Dwarf
-- regerminans     Regerminating
-- Sainsburyana    Sainsbury


_Foliis sparsis._   _Leaves scattered._

-- foliacea        foliaceous
-- ollula          pot-shaped
-- pedunculata     pedunculated


_Foliis quaternis._  _Leaves by fours._

-- Bauera          Bauer
-- mollis          soft
-- Solandroides    Solander-like
-- splendens       splendid


  _Foliis senis._   _Leaves by sixes._

-- Imperialis      Imperial


ANTHERÆ CRISTATÆ.             TIPS CRESTED.

 _Foliis ternis._             _Leaves by threes._

-- Andromedæflora, _alba_    Andromedæflora, _white_
-- droseroides, _minor_      Sun-dew-leaved, _small_
-- flagelliformis            Whip-shaped
-- pumila                    Dwarfish
-- reflexa                   Reflexed
-- rupestris, _rubra_        Rock-growing, _red_
-- taxifolia, _major_        Yew-leaved, _large_
-- triflora                  Three-flowered
α vernex, _longiflora_       α Varnished, _long-flowered_
β --, _rubra_                β --, _red_


ANTHERÆ BICORNUTÆ.       TIPS TWO-HORNED.

  _Foliis ternis._        _Leaves by threes._

-- cruciformis          cross-growing
-- Infundibuliformis    Funnel-shaped
-- magnifica            Magnificent
-- rugosa               wrinkled
-- Shannonea            Shannon
-- viridiflora          green-flowered


ANTHERÆ MUTICÆ.             TIPS BEARDLESS.

_Foliis ternis._             _Leaves by threes._

E. aristata, _minor_        Bearded, _small_ H.
-- Bandonia                 Bandon
-- costata, _superba_       Ribbed, flowered, _superb_
-- crassifolia              Thick-leaved
-- dumosa                   Bushy
-- glomerata                Crowded
-- Jasminiflora, _minor_    Jasmine, flowered, _small_
-- moschata                 Musk-scented
-- peltata                  Shield-shaped
-- perspicua                Perspicuous
-- Plukenetia, _albens_     Plukenet, _whitish_
-- serpyllifolia            Wild thyme, _leaved_
-- Thunbergia               Thunberg
-- transparens              Transparent
-- undulata                 Waved


_Foliis quaternis._          _Leaves by fours._

-- Beaumontia             Beaumont
-- colorans               Discoloured
-- Coventrya              Coventry
-- exudans                Exuding
-- Lawsonia               Lawson
-- Linnæa, _superba_      Linnæa, _superb_
-- minutæflora            Minute-leaved
-- mirabilis              Admirable
-- mundula                Delicate
-- pellucida, _rubra_     Pellucid, _red_
-- prestans               Excellent
-- radiata, _discolor_    Radiated, _two-coloured_
-- refulgens              Refulgent
-- ruber calyx            Red-cupped
-- Russeliana             Russel
-- stellifera             Star-like
-- sulphurea              Sulphur-coloured
-- tenuiflora, _carnea_   Slender-flowered, _flesh-coloured_


_Foliis sparsis._           _Leaves scattered._

-- quadrangularis         Four-angled


_Foliis quinis._             _Leaves by fives._

-- suaveolens             Sweet-scented
-- Echiflora, _purpurea_    Echium-flowered, _purple_


_Foliis senis._              _Leaves by sixes._

-- argentiflora           Silver-flowered
-- exsurgens, _hybrida_     Exsurgent, _hybrid_
-- formosa, _bicolor_       Handsome, _two-coloured_
-- recurvata                Recurved
-- Salisburia               Salisbury
-- Templea                  Temple

ALPHABETICAL INDEX

TO THE

FIGURES IN VOL. IV.


217. Erica Andromedæflora, _alba_.

218. ---- argentiflora.

219. ---- aristata, _minor_.

220. ---- Bandonia.

221. ---- Bauera.

222. ---- Beaumontia.

223. ---- colorans.

224. ---- Comptoniana.

225. ---- costata, _superba_.

226. ---- Coventrya.

227. ---- crassifolia.

228. ---- cruciformis.

229. ---- droseroides, _minor_.

230. ---- dumosa.

231. ---- echiflora, _purpurea_.

232. ---- exsurgens, _hybrida_.

233. ---- exudans.

234. ---- flagelliformis.

235. ---- foliacea.

236. ---- formosa, _bicolor_.

237. ---- glomerata.

238. ---- grandinosa.

239. ---- Imperialis.

240. ---- infundibuliformis.

241. ---- Jasminiflora, _minor_.

242. ---- Lawsonia.

243. ---- Linnæa, _superba_.

244. ---- magnifica.

245. ---- minutæflora.

246. ---- mirabilis.

247. ---- mollis.

248. ---- moschata.

249. ---- mundula.

250. ---- nivalis.

251. ---- Ollula.

252. ---- pedunculata.

253. ---- pellucida, _rubra_.

254. ---- peltata.

255. ---- perspicua.

256. ---- Plukenetia, _albens_.

257. ---- præstans.

258. ---- pumila.

259. ---- pygmæa.

260. ---- quadrangularis.

261. ---- radiata, _discolor_.

262. ---- recurvata.

263. ---- reflexa.

264. ---- refulgens.

265. ---- regerminans.

266. ---- ruber-calyx.

267. ---- rugosa.

268. ---- rupestris, _rubra_.

269. ---- Russeliana.

270. ---- Sainsburyana.

271. ---- Salisburia.

272. ---- serpyllifolia.

273. ---- Shannonea.

274. ---- Solandroides.

275. ---- splendens.

276. ---- stellifera.

277. ---- suaveolens.

278. ---- sulphurea.

279. ---- taxifolia, _major_.

280. ---- Templea.

281. ---- tenuiflora, _carnea_.

282. ---- Thunbergia.

283. ---- transparens.

284. ---- triflora.

285. ---- vernix, _longiflora_.

286. ---- vernix, _rubra_.

287. ---- viridiflora.

288. ---- undulata.

*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK COLOURED ENGRAVINGS OF HEATHS;
VOL. 4 ***

Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the
United States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG™
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away--you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.

START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg”), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg™ License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg™
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg™ electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the
person or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph
1.E.8.

1.B. “Project Gutenberg” is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg™
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (“the
Foundation” or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg™
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg™ name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg™ License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg™ work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg™ License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg™ work (any work
on which the phrase “Project Gutenberg” appears, or with which the
phrase “Project Gutenberg” is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

  This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
  most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no
  restrictions whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it
  under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included with this
  eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the
  United States, you will have to check the laws of the country where
  you are located before using this eBook.

1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg” associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg™
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg™ License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg™
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg™.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg™ License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg™ work in a format
other than “Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg™ website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original “Plain
Vanilla ASCII” or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg™ License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg™ works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
provided that:

• You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
  the use of Project Gutenberg™ works calculated using the method
  you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
  to the owner of the Project Gutenberg™ trademark, but he has
  agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
  within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
  legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
  payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
  Section 4, “Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
  Literary Archive Foundation.”

• You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
  you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
  does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg™
  License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
  copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
  all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg™
  works.

• You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
  any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
  electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
  receipt of the work.

• You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
  distribution of Project Gutenberg™ works.

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg™ trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg™ collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain “Defects,” such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the “Right
of Replacement or Refund” described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg™ trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you “AS-IS”, WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg™ work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg™ work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg™

Project Gutenberg™ is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg™'s
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg™ collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg™ and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at
www.gutenberg.org

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's business office is located at 809 North 1500 West,
Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation's website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg™ depends upon and cannot survive without
widespread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular
state visit www.gutenberg.org/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg™ electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg™ concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg™ eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg™ eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg™,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
